“Well, I was that overachieving athlete that just lost loved playing sport.  I played three different sports in high school and was OK in all of them, but not exceptional in any. But my high school football coach captured my heart, and I performed at the highest level possible every day I was around him.  I cannot tell you why. I just know that I wanted to play and practice as well as I could.  In my college years, I knew I wanted to coach because of the impact that Mike Corbett, my high school football coach, had on me.  I remember telling my college academic adviser I wanted to coach and she told me there was no such major. Like so many that wanted to coach, I became a physical education major.  I wanted the athletes to play as hard for me as I did for Coach Corbett.  I remember how much we enjoyed, as athletes, being around each other with Coach Corbett even away from the game.  Not knowing any strategies to do, I came up with the idea of having my basketball kids spend the night in that gym prior to the first home basketball game. And that’s when it hit me for the first time.  With 12 pairs of eyes looking directly at me, I understood that they would believe anything I was about to tell them.  I had already told them that spending the night of the basketball floor would make us a better basketball team.  To this day I am not sure what I shared, but the memory of the impact and influence that I had as a coach at that moment was undeniable. You would think that would be enough to create my coaching narrative but I began to want more.  My problem was I could not define what “more” meant, so I left coaching and began to follow more of a sport administrative route… and I was good at it.  It led our family to move to Central Florida and become part of the Disney sports tourism market.  I was making more money, traveling literally throughout the world, and yet all the time missing being a coach.  As I was about to close a major contract involving Olympic teams and the Disney sports complex in Orlando, the contract fell through and I was released from the contract that I had with Disney.  I was 40 years of age, across the ocean and the only thing I could do was call my wife back in central Florida and tell her that I just lost my job.  You know you have married well when your spouse will tell you exactly what you need to hear, when you do NOT want to hear it!  She said to me, “You come on home. What happened to the guy I married that loved being a high school coach?”  After coming home I began to reflect on my desire to coach and why I ever left it.  I even remember one morning getting up real early and going out in my driveway and laying down and just cry my eyes out asking the simple question, “WHY?”  And this began the internal quest to discover what the best coaching methodology is.  No longer was I asking what, where, when, how, but one simple question… why?  It was only a few days later that I received a call from a local principal who wanted me to be a part of an interview team to help find a new football coach for the local new high school being built.  It was interesting as I was now looking for coaches that could define their “why.”  It was during this process that I found a coach applying for this coaching position that I had known years earlier, that had no clue to his why, but had a great winning record.  I called him to discuss this new job and he wanted to talk about the frustrations that he had as a coach as related to the players and parents, and even his own wife and children.  His comments were, “I can win football games, but it’s everything else that’s frustrating me and causing me to lose the joy of coaching.” After that call he and I met one Saturday morning and I’ll never forget sitting down with him and having the best coaching clinic discussion I have ever had.  I had been to a thousand clinics, but never had the discussion he and I both had that day.  That’s when he stated, “If I ever get a head job again, I’m going to do it right.” The two of us began to discuss what it would mean to do it “right.”  He ended up getting the job at this new public high school. Guess who his first hire was…me! He hired me to be his offensive coordinator.  For the next decade we had a blast by asking ourselves in every decision we made on and off the field this very simple question… “why?”  It changed everything.  We began to see players, parents, coaches and administrators in a different light and tried to come up with strategies to engage and enhance them all.  It was during this time that I went back to Florida State University and for the next seven years worked on my doctorate degree.  I began to look at the research into best coaching practices and it was during this time that I realized that coaches that coach in three dimensions seem to have athletes that play well, relationships that are enhanced, lifelong learning and a personal sense of well-being as a coach.  I titled it 3Dimensional Coaching.  The really cool thing now is I get to teach this in an undergraduate and graduate coaching specialization degree at the University of Central Florida. I get to share this information and methodology with coaches and administrators around the world and most importantly, I’m back in coaching and loving it! Literally.”