So what has changed?  Well, in the last generation or so just about everything! Two generations ago you would not even have the need to discuss what we’re talking about.  We are now living in the second generation of the entitlement era…  “What’s in it for me?”  There was a time in our culture where a coach just coached the sport, no questions asked, “Just do what I say and do it well.”  It was a time of simple obedience to authority.  Teachers, law enforcement officials, parents, coaches…  just obey them because they are in authority.  Well we all of know that we have live in a very affluent time for two generations.  This ability to have acquired so much stuff or the desire to obtain the stuff has now led to two generations of “it is about me.” This includes the majority of athletes you coach and their parents.  This age of ”about me” has caused a shift or breakdown in lot of the traditional values of our culture, especially family dynamics where many of the kids do not have their biological parents at home as many leave their family to look for a new (entitlement) way, new adventures, more money, more things….more!1 And it affects all socioeconomic levels.  This has caused a real identity crisis in our culture.  And guess what?  When you are struggling with an identity guess what will give you one? SPORT.  When you play sport you have an automatic identity.  You’re on a team, you’ve defined goals, you wear a common uniforms, you have a common color scheme, can measure outcomes and levels, you have a scoreboard to measure “success”…  In other words, you have an identity.  That is why we presently have 30 to 50,000,000 kids playing sports.2 Never before have we seen an infatuation with a discretionary activity like this.  There is not one single law that demands that we play sport but it is the number one thing we do, participate in, and support on a discretionary basis.  It is what we do as a culture in our non-work related time.  In fact, it is the number one thing that kids do besides go to school and that is required by law.  Have you ever ask the question why?  If the sport gives an athlete and their parents an identity, then the question must be asked what is that identity?  I used to get mad at that Dad who showed up at practice every day at 3:30.  I wanted to ask him don’t you have a job?  Now I realize it’s the best he can do.  He just knows he feels good when his son or daughter makes the nine-year-old All-Star team.  Even the athlete that does not have adequate supervision at home embraces support structure to be part of a cause.  And we have to ask ourselves that same question.  What is the cause?  With all this attention being generated on sport, there is only one that person that controls what sport teaches…the COACH!  It has been said that the two most powerful words in the life of an adolescent are “coach says”. The coach is one of the last authority figures that can tell a 16-year-old to “get on the bus.” and they will even if they don’t know where the bus is going…”get on the bus”.  It is crazy how much influence a coach has in the culture today.  It’s been said that one coach will impact more young people in one year than the average person does in a lifetime.3 Coaches leave a legacy, no question…or maybe we should redefine the question. The question is, what is that legacy?  Because of all the uncertainty and entitlement in our culture today, if you want to maximize performance and potential, today’s players must be driven by their heart.  A 3Dimensional coach knows the key to great leadership is the ability to capture people’s hearts.  If you capture the heart, you capture the entire person and attitude and effort go sky high.  So here’s a simple but profound question.  What are your strategies to capture the hearts of your players and parents?  Notice I said players and parents.  You now have to coach two generations.  I did not want to hear this for the longest time.  Just let me coach the players and parents you stay “over there!” My strategy to coach parents was to put as many locks on the doors between the parking lot and my practice field or my office as I could. That no longer works.  But oh my, when you capture the hearts of your players and parents, performance goes way up and there is a sense of well-being with all those involved.  The sad part is this is very rare.  It is more common to see this; discourse, anger, resentment and frustration by coaches, players, parents and administrators…  and remember we choose to play sport!  There has to be a better way and this is the way. Or maybe better said, this is the “why.”