So what is three dimensional coaching?  A three dimensional coach realizes the power of the platform that you have to inspire, motivate, and produce positive change in your sphere of influence.  We desire for you to create a 3Dimensional Coaching strategy so that you can maximize your influence and fulfill your  purpose as a coach in today’s culture.  3Dimensional coaches are; fundamentally sound, skilled at coaching the mind, focused on developing the heart and clear on your transformational purpose as a coach. First dimension coaching deals with the fundamentals, or the physicality of sport. The reason this is the first dimension is because sport is physical in nature and has to be developed at all times. We have defined the eight areas that all sports have in common with the physicality.  They are as follows; strength the ability of a muscle our group of muscles that can do a movement pattern over and over, power (the explosiveness or maximum effort of the same muscles. Cardiovascular commonly called conditioning, not a correct term. This deals with the ability to get oxygen to the muscles and to remove carbon dioxide and lactic acid out of body.   Speed how fast you can go from point A to point B in a straight line.  Baseball measures speed in 90 feet increments, softball 60 feet, the length of the base path.  Football 40 yards, even though coaches are more concerned about 20 yard speed. Listen, it seems that you are born with a certain fast-twitch muscle fiber. But you can increase that through proper training and techniques. Quickness how fast you can move in space in multiple directions.  This is why we have cone drills, dot drills, ladders, tires, you name it.  Technique the biomechanics, the ability for the body to leverage itself in the summation of forces for a particular skill set.  If you are watching this video, you know those coaches that are great pitching coaches, hitting coaches, fielding coaches, swing coaches, throwing coaches, jumping coaches, shooting coaches, serving, catching, kicking, etcetera. The development of skill is so important.  Repetition to do a movement pattern over and over again so it becomes somewhat second nature or automated performance. How about the tactics the X’s and O’s of the game.  The ability to place players in the proper position on the field or court so as to maximize their abilities. Each of these eight areas are sport-specific and they are important, but let’s be honest.  How good are we getting in the first dimension?  The average weight room in a high school today is better than an average weight room in a division one university just two generations ago.  We know how to get athletes bigger, stronger, and faster.  And that is good.  I attend so many sports specific coaching clinics and ninety percent of the clinic schedule is all about first dimension development.  You can go online, contract with sports specific trainers or attend clinics.  The resources are almost unlimited…  But surveying the coaches we found out this is not the area of main concern now.  It has to do with second dimension issues. Second dimension: This is what the second dimension is all about.  It deals with the mindset of relationships between coach and athlete, coach and parents, coach and administrators and even maybe coach and personal family. If you were like me, as a coach I could tell when an athlete was not motivated, or confidence was waning, or anger and frustration was a more common emotion than joy an excitement, or a lack of a team gelling as one, or the majority of folks so fixed on unrealistic outcomes that there was little joy in the journey. I could recognize the second dimension issues but I seemed so inadequate with coaching strategies that could produce positive change. I often ask this question. What is the difference between a fan and a coach? A fan sees a play unfold and if the play was good then they will applaud. But if the play was not a success, they would quickly voice what you “should have” done this.  A fan can only see “what is” and then respond to only “what was.”  A coach sees “what is” and has a plan to move forward. If you complain a lot about unmotivated athletes, improperly motivated athletes, the tenderness of the mindset of athletes today, so much frustration and anger being exhibited, and entitled generation of its only ‘about me’ and unrealistic performance outcomes and then you are just a fan. I was that for way too long. I needed and then desired to find real strategies, just like we all implement in the first dimension to get better.  If I had an athlete that had poor throwing mechanics I had a strategy, whether it was related to strength or power or cardiovascular or speed or quickness or technique or tactics, to implement and we repeated the strategy until we could fix the throwing problem. I cannot imagine coaching if I could not have a strategy in each area of the first dimension.  Second dimension issues are no different.  What has happened in a very short period of time is that the mindset of athletes, parents and sometimes administrators have changed quicker than coaching strategies have caught up.  Let’s change that! Third dimension: This is the area that very few discuss but is the core essence of what ties it all together.  We’re talking about the heart of the coach, the executive center of who you really are.  We’re talking about the identity, character, significance, values, self-worth and purpose of you.  I was 40 years of age before I began this intentional journey and it changed everything, I mean everything, for the good of athletes, parents, administrators, even my role as a husband and a dad.  Let the transformational journey began and let you begin to define... why do you coach?