If I was you watching this introduction to 3Dimensional coaching, I know one question I would have? How are the athletes going to perform?  That’s a very fair question because sport is a performance based activity.  Research shows that coaches who coach in three dimensions are more likely to produce athletes who: 1. learn skills quicker (more attentive), 2.   Achieve higher fitness compliance (they tend to work hard are). 3.  Experience shorter rehabilitation (they recovered from injury faster). 4.  Are more adaptable to new conditions (they play well on the road), 5.  Possess the freedom to be creative (they are ‘gamers’), 6.  Develop deeper relationships with other players and with coaches (life lessons).4 One of my sons, who is now a high school head coach, had an opportunity to play at one school with a solid first dimensional coach for two years and then had to change schools because of zone line changes and played two years for a true 3Dimensional coach.  By the way, I use the word true because you cannot be a 3Dimensional coach without being truthful and transparent.  The school he played for with the one dimensional coach had better athletes, as related to college scholarships, better facilities and a bigger budget as related to the school vs the 3Dimensional coach.  But in 10 years, including the two years my son was with the 3Dimensional coach, the 3Dimensional coach beat the one dimensional coach every year.  It seemed that no one outside the programs could figure it out.  The first dimensional coach would shake his head and often mumble about how frustrated he was in regards to this game.  By all physical characteristics, first dimension, the first school should have won every year.  Please don’t get me wrong.  Being a first dimensional coach only is not wrong but you are only getting part of the full potential of the athlete.  Remember, 3Dimensional coaches must be great first dimensional coaches as well. As I was developing this material I asked my son, now that he’s a coach, what was the difference?  You know what his answer was?   “Dad, Coach ‘O’ captured my heart.  In fact, he captured all our hearts.”  And then on his own without looking at the ‘above’ results of 3Dimensional coaching he explained; we were tuned into every word he said (more attentive).  Side note: any of you have focus issues with your kids today? “With the first dimension coach I felt like I HAD to go work out in the off-season in the weight room but with Coach O, I WANTED to go work out.  All of us did, and we knew could beat the other team not because of our best athletes, because they actually had more, but we beat them with our ‘glue’ athletes…”  Those that probably were not going to play in college but got so strong and quicker as related to their physical abilities.  “Dad when I was playing with the first dimension coach, in the off-season a handful of athletes would work out a regular basis, but with Coach O we had hundreds and when you have that many so excited about working out by the time they became juniors and seniors we were strong with our first team and second team and sometimes third team athletes (worked harder). Dad, when one of us got hurt we would do everything the athletic trainer told us to do in order to get back to playing (recover from injury faster).  We loved being with each other.  We did not care where we played.  We would play in the middle of a pasture.”  It was fun (they play well ‘on the road’…or pasture!). “Dad, I could not wait to game time.  I so looked forward to playing my best (‘gamers’).  And I learned so much about myself as related to goals and aspirations in the future.  I developed friendships for life.  I owe so much of who I am to how I was coached by Coach O. (learn life lessons).”  Folks, don’t get me wrong.  This is not some prosperity gospel of how to coach. That is, “Be a great 3Dimensional coach and you will win all of your games.”  I wish I could write that book.  It would be a bestseller. I’d make a ton of money, but it would be a lie.  You can be a great 3Dimensional coach and play a team coached only in the first dimension, and if that team is bigger, faster and stronger than you… then you probably will still get beat on the scoreboard.  But all things being equal in the first dimension, the 3Dimensional coach gets a much better result in performance and relationships.