The 3Dimensional Coaching journey is structurally based on the Learning Circle, the work of Mike Breen and the team at 3D Movements. Learning is defined as a change in behavior.  Any real learning is a growth process and growth takes time.  Let’s look at Time. The Greeks had two words for time. The first is Chronos.  That one we know well.  From it we arrive at words like chronology.  Chronological time, linear time.  It inexorably marches on in minutes, days, months and years, and we march with it.  It is an unstoppable force that pushes us along whether we like it or not.  This form of time keeps us on a path.  In fact the principle of the path states that no matter whether you are male or female, educated or uneducated, rich or poor, if you are on the path it will take you the same place. The other word for time, one we’re not as familiar with is Kairos Time, it is opportunity, or fitting time.  the “fleeting rightness of time and place that creates opportune atmosphere for actions, words, or movement”; Kairos is pregnant time, the time of possibility.  Time not measured by minutes but moments - Significant events where our lives change or at least have an opportunity to do so.  There are Kairos moments as a people, as a nation, and as individuals.  They can be positive or negative. Moments of triumph and joy as well as moments of sadness and loss.   These moments can be unmissable, or sometimes they are masked in the mundane. Here’s our Premise:  Some aspects of the sports world is broken and is in desperate need of change.  This change will never come by more skillfully executing what we are presently doing.  Chronos time will never correct direction.  It marches inexorably toward the end it is pointed.  If we are going to change to a more excellent way, a more beautiful way, it will require Kairos moments, Kairos time.    (2:40)The effect of Kairos moments opens the possibility for you to get off the path to do two things: Re-think, Re-form, then re-engage on a new trajectory.  The learning circle is divided into these two parts with 3 steps on each side.   Observe: The initiation of Kairos time can either be positive or negative.  In our language either in the beautiful or the ugly.  We get people to stop in the Chronos march with either the breath-taking joy and beauty of sport done right, or the ugliness of the consequences of marching forward according to the transactional ways of the present system.  resulting in overuse injuries and physical harm; 12-year-old burnout; performance-based identity; lack of balance; broken marriages and the erosion of moral character.  Change happens through wisdom or crisis.  It is our desire to appeal to wisdom.  Every lesson doesn’t have to be learned the hard way.  Jeff’s story unit 1 was designed to help you observe. The next two steps of “rethinking” are Reflect and Discuss.   A study was done of 50 people over the age of 95 who were asked what they would do differently if they had life to live over again. These three things dominated their responses1:a. They would reflect more.b. They would risk more.c. They would do more things that would live on after they were dead.Why don’t we reflect more?  Because Reflection requires intention and time, two things that our culture conspires against.  We would all agree that more things conspire against reflection today than ever before, which makes it harder and more necessary than ever before.  The alternative to reflection is picking sides, applying dismissive labels, scape-goating and shouting louder, sometimes in 140 characters.  We just narrow our focus, many times missing the opportunity to learn, grow and see what could be beautiful.   If we are going to change course, change trajectory it will not happen without serious reflection.  Discuss:  We note that walking through the Learning Circle is best done in the context of community. Coaches talking with other coaches about what they are experiencing in coaching.  How novel! Sadly, It is as infrequent as it is invaluable. In our overextension our tendency is to go it alone. Processing kairos moments in the context of community often provides wisdom, revelation, accountability, objectivity and clarity.  That’s the re-think side.