We now enter into the re-form side. After a guided journey through 2nd and 3rd dimension sessions this training moves coaches into the Plan stage. Based on the steps you’ll take in the rethink half of the circle, we believe that discovering and crafting in writing a Transformational Purpose Statement for your coaching is the first thing you need to do in preparation to re-enter Chronos time.  The Plan process continues by allowing you to choose 2nd and 3rd dimension strategies that will help you fulfill your transformational purpose in coaching.Accountability – Even our best plans are often thwarted by a failure of will. When coaches share their plan with a trusted friend or group of friends who can provide challenge and support to follow through with the plan, they are much more likely to implement their changes.  The best form of accountability is in mentoring relationships.  When you have someone helping you and you choose to help, to mentor another coach.    Now we Act – We step out and put our plan, our beliefs into action.  We now change the trajectory of our Chronos time experience.   We have created a new path.  On the new path we watch for the opportunity to begin another trip around the circle as action often leads to more Kairos moments.  When the 3Dimensional Coaching Journey is dissected into its individual parts it may be possible to understand the parts better but the act of dissecting (by definition) kills it.  Our desire is that you don’t treat this as a program, it is a framework, a framework for the journey. It takes time to re-think and re-form.  Rethinking the dominant value system and structure of sport, discovering and crafting in writing your purpose and producing the commensurate accountable plan of action requires more than a series of workshops or a massive information dump.    But beauty is inefficient.  It requires time and attention.   Reflect more: Do the work of re-thinking, Risk more: take the risk of re-forming, and you will create something that will live on after your chronos time is up.