When it comes to the off-season or pre-season, you now should understand a simple principle you can utilize to help foster intrinsic motivation in your players… step into their lives away from the athletic environment. How about during the season like at practice?  Let me introduce the concept that seems to have significant intrinsic motivational qualities just by how we coach at practice.  A term that is used interchangeably with the word ‘coaching’ is the term ‘modeling’.  See the beauty of second dimensional coaching is not about a bunch of words we say, but rather who we are and what we do.  Kids today have heard everything.  They have access to more information and have had more people tell them things to do or not to do.  What I love about this generation is they want to see it not just be told it.  Words into action are the key.  Well, there’s three types of modeling: Leader Modeling, Peer Modeling, and Self Modeling.   Let’s go through them in order. 1.  Leader model; This is where the coach demonstrates the skill or behavior. It must start with the leader, the coach.  Nothing has changed.  You set the practice schedule, you determine what skills are to be taught, what strategies to be employed.  In other words you orchestrate the program you lead.  The issue with first dimensional coaches, is this is all they know.  I tell you what to do, show you how to do what and then you do it.  I love that model.  It’s the model I grew up with.  Why?  Because I was the last of that blind obedience generation.  I just did what I was told by authority figures.  Now, kids and parents seem to question everything.  So, if that only gets me mad then I have reverted to being a fan not a coach.  I need a strategy.A big part of second dimensional coaching is about our ability to operate from a place of empathy. Empathy is the ability to understand and share the feelings of another. 1 Remember that a coach, although often respected as an authoritative figure, is not always the easiest person for an athlete to relate to. They often hold you on a pedestal. They EXPECT you to be the expert, but that doesn’t mean they can see themselves executing a task with the same ease. This creates a case that the coach may NOT always be the MOST EFFECTIVE way to show athletes how to perform a task. 2  Yes, you need to set the tone, but simply leader modeling doesn’t guarantee that there will be attention or learning that takes place.3 It can be effective, but a MORE effective way for an athlete to learn is through PEER-modeling.