A quick review of what we learned in the last unit. There are four areas where we need to have strategies if we want a group of individuals to come together as a team. They are… Individual task: This is the extent to which the individual’s actions are coordinated with the group’s actions in order to achieve its goals. Group task: This is the way the group functions as a whole to achieve its goals. Remember, task has to do with the first dimension. The other half of the equation has to do with the relational component of the team. We already looked at individual relational. This is the quality of the individual members’ relationships within the team. We need to have strategies to connect individually with our players, and to allow them to connect individually with each other. For the rest of this unit, we will focus on the benefits of implementing group relational strategies. This is the general quality of the relationships within the group. 

The key here is a plan. We need to develop an action plan that lets the team enjoy each other’s company and get to know each other on a deeper level in a group setting. There are lots of different ways to achieve group-relational unity, but here is the main principle I want you to get…. Whatever you do, have some strategies to get your athletes together OUTSIDE of the athletic environment. Away from the field. More than ever, teams are practicing year round it seems. It’s amazing how off-season first dimensional training has evolved over the years, even at the youth level. Kids spend so much time together INSIDE the athletic environment already, we need to get them away from time-to-time. We established earlier that few things shape our identity like sport does. There can be a healthy side of this, when athletes feel like they are a part of a community that’s working for a common cause. Learning to work together as a contributing member of a community for a common good is a great life lesson we want them to get, but if it’s all about the first dimension “tasks” all the time, the identity forming nature of sports can have an unhealthy effect just as easy. Sport quickly can be mistaken as an identity itself where kids begin to adopt the mindset that their identity, self-worth and significance are wrapped up in what they performance. We need to help them realize that sports are what they DO, not who they are. Getting them together OUTSIDE of the sporting environment is not only a great way to build group-relational unity, but it can do so in such a way that communicates that there is more to this team’s cohesion than just our pursuit of goals, it’s based in depth of relationship.
