“Everybody can be great because anybody can serve. You don’t have to have a college degree to serve. You don’t have to make your subject and verb agree to serve. You only need a heart full of grace. A soul generated by love.” 

Wow. What a powerful statement from one of the greatest servant leaders our world has ever known, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. King wasn’t specifically talking about athletes, but his concept of serving is one of the most effective ways to build team cohesion at any level of sports. Athletes from youth leagues, junior high school, high school, college and the professional ranks can all greatly benefit when they learn to turn their efforts towards helping others. 

One of the best ways to create unity is to give your athletes the opportunity to serve others. Here’s how it works. During the off-season or preseason, you are going to take the entire team to some place to help others that are in need. It does not need to be complicated, just planned. If we can spend countless hours planning to go to 7 on 7 camps, travel team tournaments, etc. then this will be a breeze. 
Even if it is just once a year, there’s something special that takes place when a group comes together for a common goal that takes them outside of sports and introduces them to a higher purpose. This might be working with “Habitat for Humanity” to help build someone a home. It could be painting someone’s house. It could be visiting a children’s hospital. It might be serving meals to homeless families on a special holiday. There are countless ways that teams can come together and serve others within your community.

One of the top high school public school teams in our area has a veteran, hard-nosed, very solid first dimension coach. He was beginning to go through the frustrations, as so many coaches do, of all the ‘me first’ entitlement with the players and parents. He came to one of our 3D workshops and we were going through this area of team cohesion…when they have to build their second dimension strategies. Here is what they do for group-relational. In the summer the team, coaches and selected parents go serve in a state sponsored orphanage. Coach says it very simply: “It changed everything.” He had a leading booster arrange the trip. The director of the orphanage could not believe this request. He was overwhelmed that teenagers, coaches and parents wanted to come be with these kids. The majority of these orphans will never be adopted. What did they do? Fixed fences, painted buildings but mainly just played (you have never seen such playing) with kids & hung out. This will be their fourth year going. The cost is minimal. The results are phenomenal. As they leave on the last day there’s so much emotion of joy because so much love was shared. They keep up with each other through correspondence throughout the year. The team cannot wait until next off-season! The coach says we become so ‘one’. Why does this work? Because it is so counter-culture… But it is so team ‘team’. The focus is on helping others…TEAM. When asked by a reporter at the beginning of the season what is their secret to such great performance the coach responded, ‘instead of going to one more off-season camp we go to an orphanage.” The reporter was stunned & silent. She was waiting for some special offense secret or defensive philosophy but instead she got a great life lesson. If you want to become great, you need to learn to serve others. By the way, which parents go as chaperones? You know the answer. Those moms and dads that hang around practice all the time. They were so excited to be asked to be a part of the team trip. And when they come back, they’re different as well. They begin to see “team” not individuals. Great stuff. Remember, this generation wants to see it… not just be told.
