I could go on and on about coaches and their strategies. Just recently a baseball coach was sharing about the ‘me first’ generation and various alcohol problems he was having with the team. So his off-season strategy? They called a resident’s detox in town and ask if the baseball team could come each day and just serve. The director of the center was overwhelmed and overjoyed. It took no financial sacrifice, only a few days. The result? Unselfishness, team first and a whole lot less of alcohol problems with the team. Now that is becoming a regular part of their off-season strategy.
Serving has such a powerful effect because it changes our perspective. Until we are put in situation where we open our eyes and see the needs of others, by nature our focus will be on us. On OUR success. As second dimension coaches though, we need to coach beyond “success” and for SIGNIFICANCE. We need to help athletes gain new perspective. If our focus is only locked in our own success, it often leads to the trampling down of others. Beating others on the scoreboard is great, but that’s not the mentality we necessarily want others to take into life. Life is not a game to win, it’s a gift to be cherished. We don’t want our athletes to misuse their gifts in an attempt to win the so-called “game of life” OVER others. We want them to use their gifts to help others find victory in their lives too. When we pursue significance, we don’t trample others, we elevate them. We not only ELEVATE others, but we also elevate the very meaning of success too in the process. In the next session, we will start talking about goals and the role they play in helping us attain success. I’ll save most of my commentary for that unit, but as it pertains to perspective, I will add this. Goals are powerful because they help us narrow our focus. CAUTION! We need to be careful with goals, because they NARROW OUR FOCUS. Serving others will broaden our perspective and help establish group-relational cohesion.

As we wrap up this session. The formula for team cohesion is simple but so profound; individual –task, group-task, individual-relational, group-relational. I know you already have great strategies for the “task” part of the formula… Now be creative and create strategies for the relational part. Who are those strategic partnerships that you can establish in your community? Reach out to them, and establish a mutually beneficial relationship. Remember, it is a dynamic process… ongoing but great results…TEAM!
