A few years back I was at a basketball game that would determine if that team went to the final four. The coach was a great 3D Coach and wanted me to come watch his game. With just a few seconds on the clock, down by one, no timeouts, other end of the floor, one of his players was shooting a two free throws after a shooting foul. He makes both they win the game, he makes one they tie, misses both they lose. The first shot banged off the back left part the rim, missed. My coach friend was trying to yell something to the athlete. The athlete had his back to him on the other end of the floor & could not hear him, the crowd was going crazy. The referee bounced the ball to the shooter, three dribbles, shot, ball went off the back left side of the rim again, missed, game over. I waited around a while after the game to talk to the coach. Their kids had played so hard and with such great attitude and effort but fell short. The gym was empty except for a few administrators and custodians and the coach came out of the locker room with the player that had missed the free throws and a basketball. I watched as they went to the same free throw line where he had missed two shots earlier. You could see the dejection on the athletes face. The Coach stood in front of him and said this. I’m so sorry that I used my last timeout. Do you know what I was yelling to you? The athlete said no I could not hear you. The coach said I was yelling BEEF. B balance, E eyes on the rim, E elbow in, F follow thru. Before the coach could even end this acronym, the athlete said ‘my elbow was out wasn’t it?’. The coach said yes. The coach knew that when an athlete is tired many times the shot becomes ‘lazy’ with an extended elbow away from the body that causes the hand turn, thus pushing the ball left. The coach gave the athlete the ball, right there at the free throw line, and said shoot the ball and remember the coaching points; B balance, E eye on rim, E elbow in, F follow thru…BEEF. The athlete made five perfect free throws in a row. The athlete was only a junior and I love what the coach said, “I hope we’re back right here next year in this exact same situation and you get to shoot these free throws…” so why did I share the story? I am sure the outcome goal was to try to win the game. I am sure the performance goal was 75% from the free throw line. But did any of that make any difference at that moment? I don’t know what the free throw percentage would have been if the athlete had made both or one or neither. 75% had nothing to do with it at at that moment… but process did. Be a coach of process.