Coaches, as we wrap up the 2nd dimension training, it’s important to remember that 3D is best thought of as a framework. As you learned early on in this training, every framework needs to be built on a solid foundation for it to withstand the storms of life. The foundation for the 3D framework IS the coaches very own personal TRANSFORMATIONAL PURPOSE STATEMENT. But before a coach can truly begin to understand PURPOSE, we must learn to distinguish between GOALS and purpose.
Hopefully you understand from the last session that goal setting IS important.  Goals are powerful because they help us narrow the focus. But, goals should come with a great caution too… because they NARROW THE FOCUS! Oftentimes, goals narrow our focus so much that we actually begin to lose sight of the more important issues of life and the relationships that mean the most to us. When this happens, it becomes very easy to confuse goals with purpose.

Goals tend to be a “what”, but purpose tends to be a reason “why”.  A goal tends to be task-oriented, whereas a purpose tends to be relationship oriented.  A good goal is realistic, time-bound and measurable. But PURPOSE transcends limits of time and is mostly immeasurable, at least in the immediate time frame.

That’s why we tend to hang in the 1st dimension.  We can watch film, cut it up, break it down, assess performance, diagnose problems, chart a plan for improvement, set goals… and march on towards the goal! But here is another caution. Goals are specific events that happen in time. Once goals are achieved, they become a piece of history. They can’t be confused with purpose, or eventually they will leave people looking in the wrong direction. Goals make great signposts for a journey, but if all we do is focus on performance goals in sports defined by winning or other 1st dimension objectives, once a career ends it leaves people looking in the rearview mirror because their identity was based in performance and their days of performing are behind them.

As coaches we need to be able to see past our goals and discover our purpose.
