Why do you coach?
Why do you coach the way that you coach?
How does it feel to be coached by you?
What is your definition of success?
We call these the “Mindsight Questions.”
Through his life’s work, and now his book “InSideOut Coaching, How sports can transform lives”, coach and author Joe Ehrmann has been at the forefront of helping coaches discover their higher calling in coaching.  As coaches, if we would take the time to answer these 4 questions, it would put us on the right track to discovering our Transformational Purpose as a coach. 
I love the progression of these questions. Why. Why. How. What.	
Most people and organizations work in the complete opposite direction. Most start with the “What”, and then get to the how. That’s where most people stop.
For example, a businessman may sell cars. That’s a “what.”
Therefore, he runs advertisements on the local cable network. That’s part of his “how.”
So what? That’s common. That’s what everyone does! There is nothing compelling about that. That alone is not going to inspire most people to buy a car from his dealership.
Compare that approach to this of another businessman. This business man, who has a 3Dimensional approach to dealing with his employees and customers, has thought through the why behind the what.
For example, in the first sentence on their website in the “About Us” section, he states “we believe in serving our customers and providing them with an exceptional buying or service experience.  Honesty, Work Ethic, Teamwork, and the Golden Rule are the values that drive our success!”
Did you catch that? He started with the “why”. To serve customers. The “How” was expressed in the statement about their core values. And the “What?” Buying cars and automotive service. He also just so happens to be one of the most successful car dealerships in a major metropolitan city.
How about you? Do you know your why? Does your “Why” drive your how and what?
Why do you coach?
Why do you coach the way that you coach?
How does it feel to be coached by you?
What is your definition of success?
We don’t have to fully answer those questions now, but it’s time to start thinking about those deeper “Why” questions. We want you to set up this 3D framework on a sturdy foundation. Goal setting alone doesn’t provide a solid foundation, we need a foundation of purpose. Before we take a shot at writing that purpose statement though, we need to go on a deeper exploration of our OWN heart first. This is our journey to take. Let’s continue that journey together. We call it the 3rd Dimension.
