I want you to imagine with me that you are back in school. You are in an ethics class taking a test. On the test is this scenario: you are offered a banned performance-enhancing substance that comes with two guarantees: 1) you will not get caught. 2) you will win every competition you enter for the next 5 years. Will you take the substance? 

That’s your ethics class. Now imagine that you are a high performance athlete (for some of us that’s a stretch). You are in the locker room as you prepare for a major competition and somebody comes up to you and says, “I see that you are really good. I’ve got this stuff, this performance enhancer that if you take it I can guarantee you will win every competition you enter for the next 5 years. & I can guarantee you there’s no chance of getting caught. For sure.” Now, will you take the substance? We’re going to push the pause button here, a few sessions later we’ll push play.

We at three dimensional coaching believe that if you are going to be a great coach, a complete coach, you need to coach at all 3 levels of coaching. The first level is found at the fundamentals. It is the physical aspect of who we are, how big, how fast, how strong, how skilled we are. Strength and speed, power, skills, tactics, techniques, those kinds of things fall at the first level. You need to be good at those. 

It is our experience both in research and in practical interactions with coaches that about 75 to 80 percent of coaches are level 1 coaches only. Meaning that if you went to their practice for a day, a week, or a season, virtually everything they did intentionally would fall into one of those categories.
This however offers us no help in the classroom and the locker room scenarios we started with.
Level 2. The mind of the player. The psychology of sport. We’ve had Dr. Jeff Duke, one of the very best, take us on a journey of understanding, teaching several sessions to help us understand and implement strategies to coach this level. It is our experience that only about 20 to maybe 25% of coaches know how to coach this level. All coaches understand the importance of this. But only 20 to 25 percent actually have intentional strategies coach this. 

 Those coaches who do know how to intentionally coach this will be of assistance in getting the right answer on that test. But it still leaves us in the fog in the locker room.

Level 3. The heart. Known also as the will or the spirit, wear things like value and worth, identity, character, purpose, significance are found at this level. The heart, which is sort of that Executive Center of who we are. The will is its function, and the Spirit is its form. The role of which is to choose what we are going to value and ascribe worth. The mind takes the information in, can I get the right answer on a test? The heart is where we will determine what we do in that locker room scenario. What will be worked out in my experience? The mind says, “is the answer right?” The heart says, “will I value that answer.” That’s where we will find help in the locker room. At this level.1
Level 1, that is sports specific. Your training at level 1 is unique to each sport. You need to be good at it. But level 1 training does not transfer that well from strength in cross country to strengthen football. A whole different type of training.

Level 2, if you know how to coach this level it generally crosses over from one sport to another. There may be some variation but if I know how to coach team cohesion in one sport, I can apply that to another. If I know how to coach for confidence in one, I can apply that to another. 
But at level 3, that’s universal. That applies in sport and in our life. All across the board. Level 3 is where we will now pick up the baton and run.
