We know at level 1, you can take a young athlete who comes into your program with no skills, and over time, with training, proper instruction, and encouragement, you take an athlete whose first nature has no skill, and you give them a second nature. 

You can do that at level 2. You can give them a new nature mentally. There is exciting new research in neuroscience backing this up.2 You can coach them in such a way that those who lack confidence start to believe that they could actually accomplish something. You can take a kid whose emotions dominate and control them, and you can teach them how their emotions can empower and serve them. You can take a team having conflict and you can show them the matrix of team cohesion that involves their relationships and their tasks and teach them how to come together. You can give them a second nature at level 2.
That's true of level 3, the spirit. I borrow an illustration from friend and mentor Joe Ehrmann. Kid’s come into this world with a keyboard wired to the most incredible data processor in the universe: the human brain.3 We are typing messages about who they are. These messages are typed as truth. We move toward and become what we believe about ourselves. When those messages are negative and they come into your program, they're filled with self-doubt because that's what they've been told their whole life, that they're losers, “you should have been like your sister,” “you can’t do that!” you have the power to help change that. You can take kids whose value and worth, their identity and significance have been assaulted, and you can speak life into them. People move toward and become that which they believe about themselves. Your words and actions can help them believe something better. You can do that. Because if you want to be a great coach and you want to help kids be all they can be, you need to address their whole being. Their body, their mind, and their spirit. Because if you neglect any one aspect of your being, that would be by definition to not be the best you can be. When you neglect one aspect of your being. Your strength will be found in how well each aspect is formed and integrated into the whole. Each aspect can be reformed and transformed as well. That's true for your athletes AND also, especially, true for you as a coach. As Joe reminds us, if you want to be a better coach, you need to be a better you.
