We need to be reminded of the incredible power, position, and privilege we have as a coach. Studies show this: the most important person in an adolescent’s life is the coach. The most influential person in our culture is the coach. Which means this: the two most powerful words in the English language are, “coach says.” “Coach says.” One warning however, great power requires great character for that to be a blessing and not a curse. Power used under to serve, to help those coaches on your staff and your athletes to be all that they can be, that's the power that blesses.

Power used over, just to accomplish tasks and goals, that power can at times do deep wounding in the hearts of athletes and others. Great power requires great character for that to be a blessing and not a curse. 

Here's another warning: you dare not be a tour guide to a land you haven't been to. This is your journey, our journey first. This is our journey of understanding, because understanding is the basis of care. You need to understand each aspect of your being to care for it well. You need to understand it of your athletes as well. Understanding is the basis of care. On this part of the journey there are 3 things we need to understand. One, we need to understand our role as a coach. What is a coach and what do you do?

Second, we need to understand the purpose of sport itself. Why do we do sports? Why is it so captivating? Where does it find it home? What's its purpose? 

And, if we are going to coach level 3, the heart, the spirit, the character and IDENTITY of athletes, then, third, we need to understand what's going on in sports that is applying this incredible pressure and how that's affecting the value and identity of our athletes and our coaches. What is the research telling us, and what can we do about it? Because, when my identity is found in sport, my significance is found in winning, my value is found in performance, the dominant motive is fear, the dominant attributes are pride and insecurity. When my identity is rightly related, my significance is found in serving, my value is found in being, the dominant motive is love, and the dominant attributes are humility and gratitude. That's the journey we are going to take.
