Understanding is the basis of care. The first thing we need to understand is the purpose of sports. Where does sport fit? What is the purpose, why do we do it? I submit that sport, this circle of sport, finds its home in a larger circle, the circle of play. Sport is a subset of play. Why do we play? Eminent child psychologist Jean Piaget succinctly says that play is always done for the pleasure of the activity. It is autotelic, self-rewarding. We play because it’s FUN! Play is one of the very few activities that engages our whole being, our body, our mind and our spirit. All 3 dimensions. It is marked by joy and wonder as it captures our imagination and our effort in process and pursuit. I want to say that again. Play engages our whole being, all 3 dimensions, it is marked by joy and wonder as it captures our imagination and our effort in process in pursuit. For many of us we were, we are, never more “alive” than when we played sports.
I ask you: What does it take to capture the imagination of a 3-year-old? Not much! 3-year-olds run around and zig zag, in circles and say “this is great,” “this is awesome,” until we enter in and say, “No Jason, you need to take all that energy and run it in a straight line because we’re going to put a stopwatch on it!” And he's going, “Why?”
Here's why: the older we get, the more it takes to capture our imagination. Thus we move from play: which is basically unstructured, imaginative physical activity; to games, which puts structure around this imaginative physical activity, finally we move one more over to sport. We go from play, to games, to sport. Sport is structured imaginative physical activity with one more thing added in to spice it up. That's the spice of competition. Competition spices our sport.
Here is the first warning we need to understand in the environment of sport. When the spice of sport becomes the purpose of sport we start to have problems. Let me illustrate: I love to put spices on my food, I love to put red peppers on almost everything. I started out putting a little bit. Then I got used to that and wanted more. What happens if that process keeps going and I say, “Wow, the excitement is in the spices. Forget the food, just give me the red peppers!” I would become dis-eased. I would become sick. It is the same thing in sports. Competition livens it up. The problem with competition is it’s not satisfied with being the spice of sport, it wants to become the purpose. When that happens competition shoves out joy and wonder and inserts winning. Winning moves from important to ultimate. Results trump process and the process becomes dis-eased. Nourishment is why we eat. The joy and wonder of the journey is why we play. Not winning. Winning is a goal, not the purpose.
