Here's the second warning. We need to be careful that we don't walk over to this competitive model that we enjoy, that frankly, we don’t handle very well, put handles on it, pick it up, carry it over here and drop it on our young kids. Because we are harming them with it. Our kids don't want our adult competitive model, they want to play. Ask them. When we impose our adult imagination in this rush to early competition we do vandalism to our children’s imaginations, shut down their creativity and there is harm in all three dimensions.
Did I want my kids to learn how to compete? Yes, if it's the kind of competition that captured their imagination and effort, and they did it with themselves and others, not against. There is a qualitative difference. Yeah, I wanted them to learn how to compete. Do you know what else I wanted my kids to learn how to do? I wanted them to learn how to drive. But I didn't take my 5-year-old and put them behind the wheel of a car! They are not ready for it! It's a readiness principle first and foremost.
It will happen for our kids just like it happened for all of us. At some point little Jason is going to say “I wonder how fast I can run from point A to point B.” We start asking questions like, “I wonder how high I can jump? How far can I run? I wonder if we got together and pooled our effort toward this imaginative end what we could attain in the process?” 
Look, if we as adults just ran around in circles because the kids made us do that what would we say really quickly? “It's boring!” Our kids, in so many ways are looking at us and saying, “This is frustrating!” When something is too frustrating or too boring for too long, we quit.
There are significant level three issues of purpose and identity in play here. When we get this wrong we have a generations of kids who have had the joy of the process robbed from them. When that happens we inevitably create an entitlement generation. We go to tournaments now, and every kid needs or wants a trophy, right? Every kid needs ribbon, a reward. We talk about that as if they created it and imposed on us. No, we created that. Think about this: When you rob the intrinsic joy you have to have extrinsic rewards. 
When we get this right the intrinsic joy and the imaginative ends fuel a dynamic, life giving process.
