Connected to our development in sport there is something else we need to understand about competition. Competition doesn’t build skills. In fact, competition is the enemy of skill development. Here's a couple reasons why. First, all skills are developed when we take the body and the mind and we overlap them. Skills are learned in that overlap. Skills require the full engagement of my mind and the full engagement of my body. Without the mind you just have athleticism. When is my mind free from the process of skill development? When repetitive patterns move from the conscious to the subconscious part of my brain. We like to say, when the information has been transferred from my mind to my muscles. We call it “muscle memory.” That's when my conscious mind is freed up for other things. 
In competition conscious thinking is always pulled away from the skills on to strategy. My thinking needs to be engaged with processing strategic data. Even in our practices. This is especially true for team sports. If you have a game on Saturday, you can't be working on your skills because you have an inbounds play to put in. You have to know how to do a press brake. Because we have to peak by Saturday. We got a game, or 3, Saturday. And we pulled away from skills and onto strategy. That's one reason competition hampers skill development. (1:30)
Here's the other related reason. For physical skill development, the higher the price of the mistake the slower the learning curve. Competition always increases the price of the mistake. What’s the difference in the price of the mistake if I’m playing with my friends on the playground, compared to playing on a team in a tournament? When I make a mistake in that tournament and we have fans staring down, and parents, and a coach who might be yelling at me and teammates that are disappointed, that price of the mistake goes through the roof! The higher the price of a mistake the slower the learning curve. When skills are not commensurate with the demands of the competition fear of the mistake is the dominant thought and feeling.
Here is the best example I can give you: what is the price of the mistake today for typing? Spell check. Backspace. No big deal. Thus, there is no fear involved in typing today. We teach little kids how to type. What was the price of the mistake when I learned how to type, my senior year in high school when I dealt enough with my masculine insecurities to enter Typing 1? Those of you under 30, let me tell you! Roll the paper up, erase it or white it out, roll it down, line it up and hit the right key. Every mistake! The dominant emotional feeling of typing at that time was fear. When the price of the mistake is so high you are always second guessing yourself. My typing speed was a blazing 18 words a minute. Kids today, easily 40 or more, way more. Which means they are getting from two to four times the number of repetitions in the same amount of time that I got. They will learn two to four times faster when you eliminate, minimize the price of a mistake.
Those two things we need to remember about competition: The Readiness principle and the impact on skill development. 
Let's let the imaginative process take care of itself in our kid’s sports. For those of you who are youth coaches, you need to remember this as a slogan: “Never be a kid’s last coach.” Never be a kid’s last coach. Keep the joy and wonder of the journey going.
