A covered carriage that takes a person of importance from where they are to where they want to or need to go.  This definition begs two questions:  First, Where are they?  Where are we picking them up for this journey.  And, where are we taking them?

I mentioned before that we are picking them up awfully early now aren't we? Where were my kids picked up for their sports experience compared to me? We are picking them up so early now.  Who are we? “We” are between three and four million youth coaches in America today, three to four million. The best research I’ve found shows that somewhere in the neighborhood of 20% have had any kind of training at all in how to coach. Only 20%! So where did they learn their methodology?   Kids are being taken on a journey by several coaches before they get to school-based sports, if you are school coaches it’s a crap shoot the journey that they've had.  Here's another issue we need to understand as they take this journey to you. Competition is life draining. Play is life giving, competition is life draining. It doesn't make it bad. But it does requires recovery time. Anything that's life draining requires recovery time. Think of the language we use for sports. You've got to get up for the competition.  Why? Because it drains you down. It doesn't make it bad. It does though require recovery time. For this reason combined with others, Kids are coming into your programs today with so little of what Dr. Richard Swenson calls in his book entitled with the same name, Margin, in their lives. Margin is defined as that space between my load, what I'm carrying, and my limits, my maximum capacity. So little margin coming into your programs today that if you don't care for their hearts, they'll quit on you. They're out of there. We blame that on the kids as I hear this all the time from coaches: “kids just aren't as tough as we were before. Kids aren't as tough today as we were.”  For all the language about toughening kids up can’t we agree that’s not the primary function that sport is to fill?  Can’t we agree that there is enough difficult things in this world our kids are facing?  I would submit that the bigger issue is they are coming into our programs today with so much more on their shoulders, so little emotional, relational and spiritual margin in their lives that they will quit on you. But if you care for them, if you see them and understand their hearts and they know that they are valued, that creates margin in our lives. Nobody quits that.  That’s life giving. They are coming in that way. 

The sport experience of our kids today has created a phenomenon impossible during my sports journey. In common vernacular we call it 12-year old Burnout.  12 year old burnout!  12 years old is when coaches first picked me up.  Middle school coaches picked me up. Look, I had some bad coaches in middle school and high school but there's no way I was going to quit. Same thing with many of you. Because we were just getting started!  Kids today, with all this margin eating competition, they are just not recovering.  They have been there and done that. It was not essential that you coached my heart when I was in school. You should have, but you did not have to. I had margin.  I submit it is essential today. If you are going to keep programs growing you have to see them beyond the skills and strategies of the game.

I had 5 wrestling matches a year in junior high. Five matches my 7th and 8th grade years. I’m not saying this is ideal.  I sure wish I would have had more.  Kids sometimes get 5 in a day today. They get a hundred in a summer. An 8 year old can get a hundred matches in a summer. They can get 200 in a year. You know your sport, you know the youth progression in your support. When we start to impose that imagination, we have to make sure that we create an environment that is life giving. When we impose a competitive imagination that has winning as its primary purpose, we will chew away at the margin in the lives of kids. And then they quit on you. Coach their hearts.
