I get to travel the world working with coaches.  One really sharp director/coach of the Ubantu Soccer Academy in Cape Town South Africa is doing a beautiful job using the 3D framework to train coaches.  While staying with him he told me of the Right to Dream Soccer academy in Ghana.  Right to Dream is recognized as one of the best Academies in the world.  Presently they have 50 – 60 players on scholarship in the US.  Several others playing professionally.  Right to Dream exists to discover and nurture role models. They provide young, talented Africans with the opportunity to fulfil their potential and the capacity to claim a better future for their communities and country.   They are picking up kids from all over West Africa as an onsite education and training facility starting at age 11, some from difficult backgrounds.  They provide covering.  They create a safe environment with a long term view of the player and the person.   Because they protect they expect much of every student-athlete.  When they send them off to clubs, high schools and universities around the world they want every athlete to have two things beyond high level skills: A “give-back” attitude and a “growth mindset.”  A give back attitude is based on gratitude for what they’ve been given.  When an athlete moves on with a give back attitude they have a better chance to be connected because they will look to serve.
A growth mindset learns to see every opportunity, every challenge, as a chance to learn.  This comes out of the work of Dr. Carol Dweck.  Mindset is defined as a mental attitude that will determine how you interpret and respond to situations.

Dweck’s research has identified 2 distinct categories; growth and fixed.  

According to the Mindset Theory, those with a fixed mindset believe that innate qualities like intelligence, talent, personality, are established and unchanging; they define who we are. This is a common perspective in our culture when we say they’re a “natural athlete”, or “born leader”.
In contrast, those with a growth mindset believe these qualities are changeable and can be developed.  In the growth mindset world, there are no “natural athletes” or “born geniuses”, just people who worked really hard to hone their skills. 

The main difference I see between fixed and growth mindset is that in the latter, achievement is not the end goal; progress is.  Learners are growth mindset; award seekers are fixed mindset. Today’s focus on “everyone gets an award” plays into the fixed mindset
 If you believe your talents are fixed, no matter how high performing you are, at some point you run into a limit – a problem you can’t solve, a move you can’t master. At this stage the fixed mindset has a few not-so-great alternatives: lie, get angry, or quit.

One of the great recent discoveries in neuroscience shows that the brain is very malleable and that we can through training change our own ability to think and to perform.

Every word and action can send a message.  It tells children/athletes how to think about themselves.  It can be a fixed-mindset message that says: You have permanent traits and I’m judging them.  Or it can be a growth-mindset message that says: You are a developing person and I am interested in your development.  The key element here is what you praise/critique and how you praise/critique.  A growth approach praises effort and good strategies not outcome.  A growth mindset approach has a relentless pursuit of the process of learning/changing/developing.  

Some of the clearest findings researchers have ever seen:  Praising children’s intelligence harms their motivation and it harms their performance.  In other words telling kids they’re gifted, smart, talented makes them brittle in the face of difficulties.  We’ve attached this side by side graphic illustrating the difference.

When athletes don’t know how to do something and others do, the gap seems unbridgeable.  Growth minded coaches tell athletes the truth and then give them the tools to bridge the gap.

Mindset change is not about picking up a few pointers here and there.  It’s about seeing things in a new way.  When coaches change to a growth mindset, We change from a judge-and-be-judged framework to a learn-and-help-learn framework.  Our commitment is to growth, and growth takes plenty of time, effort, and mutual support.

Here’s a tool for you, the next time you’re in a position to discipline, ask yourself, What is the message I’m sending here:  I will judge and punish you? Or I will help you think and learn?

Attitude and effort. Gratitude and growth.  Create and model a give back attitude and a growth mindset.
