I’m going to put a little hot water in this jug and we’ll come back to it later.
We looked at where they are, now the question: Where are we taking them?  Let’s look at the journey.  For us the vehicle isn’t a covered carriage, the vehicle is sport and the driving force is competition.  It’s time to look at the lay of the land of competition from a level 3 perspective.  Where are we taking them in the cultural land of sports?

As long as we are defining words, let’s define competition.  Competition is derived from the Latin word Competere defined as “a coming together to agree; to strive together.” When we come together to agree we are doing this “with” the other. Competition is something I do with you.  
Here’s another definition of Competition:  when two or more individuals or groups strive after something that only one of them can have. Which definition more closely captures our experience, even at the youth level?

When sport primarily becomes an activity where “two or more of us strive after something for which only one of us can have,” It becomes an exercise in self-interest.  It develops a scarcity mentality.  Now, it’s something I do “against” you. This unhealthy view of competition has significant implications.  
One implication: This view can ultimately undermine your own team.  When you compare and compete in this way, even the success of some of my teammates, the ones vying for my position, is a threat to my self-interest, to my personal success.  

Another implication: The “other” easily becomes “them.”  When we create an US and a THEM, “US” is always the good guys and “THEM” is always the bad guys.  They become the enemy or an object in our way and the temptation is to dehumanize.  

When this happens we even engage the language of war.  We aren’t shooting bullets, we’re shooting baskets! This approach to competition requires more prescience and care where physical contact is allowed or encouraged, and where helmets obscure the humanness of the face.  From this view the physical can be allowed or even encouraged to become Violent and Violence always Violates.  This requires special attention for the coaches of these sports.  There is a tremendous 3rd dimension opportunity here, especially for coaches of male athletes.  This environment lies to our boys when it teaches by default that being a man is about physical ability and the physical domination of others.  The tremendous opportunity for a coach is to teach the truth about masculinity and femininity revolving around healthy relationships and a transcendent cause.

The headline of the article read, why one of the best athletes in the world refuses to compete. That got my attention! His name is Laird Hamilton and he's recognized by his peers as the best surfer in the world.  But he doesn’t enter competitions.  When asked why he paraphrases an old saying, "A creative man is fulfilled by accomplishments and a competitive man is fulfilled by beating others," "I'm all about accomplishments. Ride the biggest wave. It has to do with me. I can always grow and keep accomplishing things."  A primary role of a 3D Coach is to unlock the creative potential in the lives of those they lead. Creativity can DRIVE productivity to a whole new level. I would submit that creativity is a much better engine for production than competition. Inspiration leads to perspiration, because inspired people work really hard at their craft! But it’s not the type of hard work that feels like hard work. It’s the type of hard work that is done with a sense of autonomy, for a pursuit of mastery, attached to a clearly defined purpose.  Creativity is ultimately how intrinsic motivation is expressed. 
Back to the Laird Hamilton example. While the masses are competing for judges’ scores riding average waves right off the coast, Laird is busy out on the horizon completely redefining what anyone thought was humanly possible in the realm of surfing!

In 2000, at the age of 36, he successfully surfed the most dangerous wave in the world that was as tall as a seven-story building. For over 30 years, Hamilton has continually flipped the surfing world upside down by constantly reinventing new ways to conquer the ocean. This is what happens when creative potential is unlocked.

Competition doesn’t have to be defined by beating others. Teach a healthy view of competition, one done with, not against, and we create a flourishing environment.   If we don’t do this, the next implication will be our reality.
