This is a cover of a Sports Illustrated magazine from 1997 on drug use in sports.  In one of the articles this scenario was presented to 198 Olympians and aspiring Olympians.  Elite, top level athletes. This is the scenario: it should be familiar to you: You are offered a banned performance-enhancing substance that comes with two guarantees: 1) you will not get caught; 2) you will win every competition you enter for the next five years.  Will you take the substance? Out of 198 Olympians and aspiring Olympians, how many of them do you think said yes to that? I get answers ranging from 10 to all of them.  The one’s who say 10 are almost always people who haven’t engaged in competitive sports, it’s not a culture they understand.  To the ones who say, “All of them.”  I remind them that what they are saying is that, “If I were an elite athlete I would take it!”  I’d encourage you to answer 197 so you have moral out.  You can say, I’d be the honest one!”

How many? 195 out of 198 said yes to that.  These same athletes were now asked to respond to the same scenario with a twist: you are offered a band performance enhancing substance that comes with two guarantees, first one’s the same: you will not get caught. The second one: you'll win every competition you enter for the next five years then you will die from the side effects of the substance.  Now, will you take it?  How many of them said yes to that?  Half. Half of them said yes to that. Why? Why do you think that's the case?  Fame, Finances, Fulfilling a dream. Why would they say yes to that scenario? As an Olympic athlete that's their life.  They have spent much of their life focused on that goal. To be an Olympian, to stand on the podium and hear their anthem played, and somebody says you can have it.  Most of us in sports, most athletes are very clear on their goals, a level two function.  What they are not clear on is level 3, their purpose. And when you have somebody say that goal you been working at for so long, it's yours. That's a heavy temptation. Especially when you're not clear on your purpose. 
That's the Olympic athletes.  That's not our kids. That's not our sport experience. A couple points on that. I want to remind you that every Olympic athlete came through a club, attended junior high and high school and had somebody like you as a coach. And if all they had were level 1 coaches, maybe some that ventured into level 2, nobody dealt with the value, worth, identity, character, significance, they were offered them no help in that scenario. That's why to be a complete coach you need to coach at all levels.

That’s the Olympic athletes, that’s not our kids. This is a moral reasoning study done of athletes: 17 years, 72000 athlete study. Here is what they found: that the longer you are in competitive sports, especially team sports, the less you make good moral decisions. The longer you are in competitive sports the less you make good moral decisions. The author of this study noted that “research had established that participation in sport negatively affects moral reasoning and moral development and concluded that while competition was neither good nor bad, the emphasis that we place on the winning to the exclusion of others, that negatively affects moral reasoning and moral development.” The Josephson Institute finds basically the same thing. These are reliable studies.
Now doesn’t that grate like sandpaper on our souls. If you are intentional to coach these, sport is the best arena to do this. Sport gives you a great opportunity to coach for moral character. But if you are not intentional the sport world culture that values winnings will squeeze the life out of it and cause some moral attributes to be eroded.
