ports builds character. Isn't that one of competition’s cultural truisms? Isn't that why we justify doing sports? Especially in an educational institution? Sports builds character. What character attributes are we talking about? With all the audiences I do this with I get basically the same answers every time. Dedication. Sacrifice. Leadership. Teamwork. Perseverance. But you can be a dedicated, sacrificing, team-working, persevering terrorist! They all apply. That’s because those aren't moral, those are performance. Those aren't moral attributes, those are accelerators. Those aren't compass, they’re fuel. Those are the attributes that once you choose where you're going, you can't get there without them. You can't get there without dedication and sacrifice. You can't get there without leadership, without teamwork.  However, these attributes are a-moral, they can take you anywhere.  The question is, where are we going, where are these attributes are taking us?
Sport left to itself builds performance character, and erode moral.  But when you intentionally coach the moral, it is the most fertile ground we have. Because in sport it’s not just a classroom, it’s a laboratory. It's got to look like something. 

So that where we are taking them. And if you don't coach this level the sports world will coach it for us. 
What’s happened to this jug?  What’s happened?  One word: Pressure!  Do you feel the pressure?  That’s not necessarily bad.  But when our internal character isn’t strong enough to push back against the dominant cultural pressures that an unhealthy view of competition and winning create, we will be deformed by it. 

Here’s one diagnostic question: if I were to ask you, and I do this with many coaches; “Coach, how is your season going?” What would you say?  The majority of coaches give me a won- loss answer.  We are seven and two. That's sort of like asking me, “Hey, how's your life going?” And I say; “I make $50,000.”  If I want to know what your record is I will ask you, “what's your record.” I asked you a process question, and you gave me a results answer. Because results have trumped process.

If I am asking you how your season is going and you are a level 3 coach, you are telling me stories about your athletes and the struggles and joys you are having, what you see them learning, and then you say and we’re seven and two. That is part of the journey. But it better not be the answer to the question, “how is your season going?”  Just like what I make is part of how I fulfill my life, but it better not be the determiner of how my life is going.  If it is I have lost the joy of the process, and function transactionally.  Same thing. That's the pressurized world of sports.

We have done enough diagnosing of the issues. But we didn’t want to give you a prescription without a diagnosis because that is what's called malpractice. This is the sports world that you and I are in, and there’s much to love. I see incredible value in its possibilities. But I have to first be honest in what is going on out there. When competition shoves out the process and inserts a result. It becomes dis-eased.  We want to re-establish the health and the joy with it.  (Blow in the jug) How we strengthen from within and reduce the unnecessary pressures from without.  That's our next step.
