I was at a wrestling coaches clinic where one of the top 5 college coaches in the country addressed the group. I will never forget what he said. He talked about creating his program, this creative act of taking a program that was mediocre when he arrived and making it into one of the best in the country. Then he looked at the coaches in the audience and said, “You need to choose how great you are going to be. Do you want to be top 20? Do you want to be top 10? Do you want to be a top 5 team? Do you want to be number 1? You need to choose how great you are going to be, because the trajectory of that choice will determine the process that you do.”
The next day I had a chance to speak to these coaches. The first thing I said is that I want to affirm what my friend shared last night. You do need to choose how great you are going to be.  But there's another choice you need to make that I think is even more important. How good do you want to be? How good do you want to be? Because if greatness is the evaluation of the quality of our work, goodness is the evaluation of the essence of our work. If greatness is the evaluation of the quality of our work, then goodness is the evaluation of the essence of your work. And we know this, there are many things in sport that are great, but they are not very good. Seven Tour de France championships was great. How good was it? There was almost a decade when more baseballs were hit over the fence than any other.  We the fans thought it was awesome.  It’s now known as the steroid era. How good was it? If greatness is the evaluation of the quality, goodness is the evaluation of the essence. If we are honest, we are more enamored by greatness than we are with goodness in sport. Have you ever thought, how good do I want my program to be?

Let me illustrate this and involve you in the process. In a moment we are going to bring up a screen for you to drag and drop attributes into 2 categories. The 1st category is “Great,” we could also call it performance.  The attributes in this category act as fuel. They are essential for us to get somewhere.  Once you have a goal you can't get there without these attributes. We pointed out earlier that these attributes are a-moral.  They can take you anywhere. 

Our 2nd category is “Good” This is the category of essence or moral. They are core to our being. Of who we are. On the negative, if we violate these, we automatically violate another person or group of people.  These attributes act as a compass.  Take some time now and put these attributes into two separate columns.
