How’d you do?   When you assess those two list you can’t help but notice how much in sports we speak about, covet and honor one list and wonder how we might possibly incorporate the other.  I did not say that one was better than the other. Because if we have attributes of essence without any attributes from the performance list, what do we have?  It’s powerless. Another word we can use is impotence. Or cowardice.  Mercy means little without sacrifice. If we have kindness without self-control? You could blow it all up. You might be doing fine along the way but if you don't exercise self-control, thinking clearly about that which matters most, you have a mess.

Greatness acts as a fuel for goodness. But that's not all it can fuel. There are other attributes that lurk in the darkness around the backside that performance attributes can and do also fuel. There are attributes like jealousy and selfishness. There are attributes that steer us like greed, and revenge. Performance attributes can fuel these as well. When we do whatever it takes to win, we fuel that which in the end can be ugly. When I am pursuing and persisting after a goal, and I am offered that substance and I take it, what am I fueling? What is that perseverance fueling? It is now fueling selfishness. Or jealousy.
 My experience is that we coach these, and we let the good and the bad play themselves out. We coach the middle. We coach for aggressiveness. we coach for discipline and mental toughness. We coach for teamwork. Sometimes we recognize this: we even coach these things too. We play off of these things. We get beat and we talk about revenge. And we fuel revenge.  These, these left to themselves have no compass. 

When greatness fuels goodness, the best word I can come up with is beautiful. When the great fuels the good you have something that can take your breath away.  It is the prerogative of beauty to win hearts. When the Great fuels these, you can have some of the ugliest stuff you'll ever see.

What we are inevitably confronted with is that, moral attributes can allow winning to be prominent, however, they refuse to allow winning to be preeminent.  Winning will not be allowed to be ultimate.  Each one of these attributes forces winning back into a goal, not the purpose. Each of these attributes forces a reframing. These attributes force us to look at the other individual or the other team as people we compete with, not enemies we compete against.  When we reframe in this way it requires both our physical best and our moral best.  Otherwise we very often bring our physical best and our moral worst.
