That wrestling coach’s clinic that I had spoken to about goodness:   2 hours later I'm flying back home and I get this voucher printed out that says the second leg of my flight from Chicago to Minneapolis was overbooked.  Did I want to volunteer?  Sweet! I might get a free ticket out of this. You bet I’ll volunteer! While I'm flying in my mind is preoccupied with this opportunity.  We land, I get out of the plane and I'm running because want to be first in line to get bumped. I want the free ticket that comes with it! And then I stopped dead. Something prompted my spirit, spoke to my heart, and asked, “how good is that?”  Just a few hours ago I'm talking to coaches about goodness and now that which is good asks, how good is that? What’s fueling this effort to get to the counter?! It was selfish ambition. Selfishness. This is a journey I have to take too and it stopped me dead. And I just started to smile thinking about what I said and I prayed; “Ok. If I get bumped, let it be a blessing to somebody else.”  Why not do good.  Better yet, why not be good instead of being consumed with personal gain.

I found out that the next two days were overbooked. They had a glitch in the system that overbooked all of their flights from Chicago to Minneapolis. I’ve got a brother in the Chicago area, I could work something out.  The boarding procedure commenced and was now ending 15 minutes before take-off.  “Mr. Hull, there are still 5 seats left.  You can board now.”  Just as she saying that, there's this commotion down the hall. Turns out are seven Polish healthcare educators running to get on this plane to which they had tickets but no boarding pass. They get to the counter, there’s this elevation of noise that happens when you have both frustration and language barriers.  “Sir! We only have 4 seats available for the 7 of you. You've got to figure out what to do. NOW!  The doors are closing” I am standing off to the side, I am starting to smile. I'm thinking, is this prayer going to be answered this quickly?!  The leader, Gregoire, reluctantly picked the 4 that spoke the least amount of English.  I told them to put one more in my seat.  The server said no, you have a ticket and you need to get on.  “No, put the fifth one on.”  They don’t know it yet but I think I can solve this problem.   I'm thinking, if they don't think I'm a serial killer I have an answer for this airline. The doors closed and I’m standing there with Gregoire and Lucas. Things calmed to a quiet, a quiet that comes with a little desperation and I said to them, “Listen, I have a solution for you. I know you have one more flight out of Chicago tonight to Eau Claire, which is where I live. I don't need to go to Minneapolis. If you put me on that flight and my two brand new friends with me, I will drive them to Minneapolis. I will drive them to their hotel. About a hundred miles away. “Awe, you would do that?!” They were so appreciative.  No I said, look. Look. I’m the one who gets the win on this. I get to be reformed from selfishness to serving. From using my power over to get what I want, to using power under to help serve somebody. I get to win on this deal. I called my wife and she picked us up at the airport, we travelled to Minneapolis and got home about 12:30 a.m.  I'm still in communication with two friends because I stopped to say, “What's selfish and what's good? What’s ugly and what's beautiful.”  
This is our journey first. You start to have eyes to see. You start to coach athletes in this way. Competition doesn’t have to be an exercise in self-interest.

Think about how you can coach from both columns and keep your eyes open even in your life for some of these things rising up. Are you jealous of other programs? Does all your imagination and effort fuel you to beat them? Is that what it’s about? Or are you using your imagination and effort to be great and good. It's our journey to take first. So let's take it.

A thought to leave you with: What if excellence meant being great at the good?
