How do you enable the great to unlock the good, for the beautiful in sport?  What is the most powerful motivating force in the universe? That force is love. Are we teaching kids how to love and to be loved, and are we demonstrating that?   Commitment and effort will be given where there is love. As coaches we’d be wise to harness this.  But first we need to redefine it for our athletes. Especially within the nature of the common functional definition, which is “that which gives me pleasure.” So we say, I love pizza. I love football. I love my girlfriend. Except if I get some bad pizza with anchovies that makes me sick. And I really don't love going out in freezing weather and sideways rain to practice. When I've had a fight, when kids have had a fight with their boyfriend or girlfriend you see how that impacts them and your practice. We have to redefine it first.  We need to define love in its intention and function as, “sacrificial giving for the sake of others.”  Love is sacrificial giving for the sake of others. For that to be true love needs to be patient. And there's the rub right there for us as coaches! Because patience takes time, and you know how short the season is!  We don't have time to exercise that, especially as a level one coach I can get the same results if I use anger, or shame and power and that takes no time at all. I can access that right now. I can get results. It's true. The problem is that besides the harm, it’s always a diminishing return deal as it requires more and more and delivers less and less. Love is patient. That's potentially one of the rubs. If you're a level 1 coach it takes too much time to do that. I have too much to work on.

Do you know what else we know about love?  Love perseveres. Now, even level 1 coaches start to listen. Level two coaches understand the nature of love and team cohesion.  When my team cares for one another they seem to perform better. Level 3 coaches understand that love is core to our existence. If I can incorporate love into my coaching, if my athletes know that I love them, the journey becomes beautiful. Love creates margin, space in our lives.  The question for us as coaches is NOT “Do I love my athletes?”  The question is, “If I asked each of your athletes, “Does your coach love you, what would they say?”  If they say “yes,” you can ask it of them, you can expect it of them for each other.  

We’ve mentioned our friend, coach and mentor Joe Ehrmann a few times on this journey.  Because he’s done the work to redefine masculinity and femininity in terms of relationships and transcendent cause, this is a big deal for him.  So much so, that when the team huddles up after practice, the coaches speak to the players, “What’s our job?” The players respond, “To love us.”  The coaches then say, “What’s your job?”  The players, “Love each other.”  

Harness the most powerful force in the Universe!
