When dealing with attributes of character we would be wise to look at the wisdom of the ancients. People who’ve gone before us, who’ve thought deeply about this.  Let’s pick up the thought that Love Perseveres. In my faith tradition, one of the most powerful insights that the ancient Christian writer Paul wrote, is when he talked about difficult situations. When he talked about trials. “I take joy in my trials because trials lead to perseverance, perseverance to proven character, a level 3 function, and proven character hope. The path to proven character is perseverance through trials. The ONLY path to proven character is persevering through trials.  

Trials lead to perseverance proven character and hope. But that's not automatic is it? That's not automatic, because we know this about trials.  Trials can very easily lead to discouragement division and dissension and ultimately despair. Have any of you been on a team with about a month left, have you COACHED a team with about a month left you're saying, man I wish this was done!? Think about that. This is supposed to be fun. This is supposed to be filled with joy and wonder and I’m saying, “I want this over!”  Have you been on a team where you’re coming to the last week and you’re saying, “this has been such a great journey, does it really have to end?!”  What was the difference?  The difference wasn’t difficulty but the direction those difficulties went.   

I would submit that every team goes through trials. In fact, it's your job to put kids in trials. If you're not putting kids in difficult situations you are not doing your job.  That’s half of it.  Then your job is to take these trials and move them towards perseverance, proven character, and hope. And not see the gravity of discouragement that leads to division and dissention, and despair setting in. That's your job. This is foundational. Everything builds off of this and how you coach athletes and their hearts. You stretch them, put them in difficult situations. Every learning experience you have is a difficult situation. Then you shepherd them north and instead of seeing gravity pull it south.

What can you do, what can you do in this process? I think there are two foundational things that are essential for this to go in the right direction. I think the first is found in the root of the downward step. The root is courage. Are you in an environment, are you people that put courage in, you encourage. Or do you see courage taken out. Are they discouraged. One of my favorite authors CS Lewis says this about courage. He said, “courage isn't simply one of the virtues,” “courage is the form of every virtue at its testing point.”  It takes courage to exercise all the attributes of goodness and greatness. It takes real courage to push back against the stuff that turns it ugly. It takes courage to tell the truth, when the opportunity is there to lie in self-interest. It takes courage to forgive.  It takes courage to do justly. It takes courage to persevere. Are you creating an environment that builds up, or when trials come do you start barking at athletes?  Do they start taking courage out of each other as well? This is not just your job. It's your job to teach athletes to speak courage into their teammates as well.
