But there is another significant aspect involved in this. It's hope. Hope is a present expectation of future good.  Hopes function is to keep our present reality open to a future possibility. That's the function of hope. To take our present reality, no matter what it is, and keep it open to a future possibility. Without hope in the future, there is no power in the present. Ask your athletes if they are hopeful for the future on your team. If they equivocate on that I will guarantee, you are getting less than their best in the present. With loss of hope is loss of power.  If any of you have been through a struggle with the issue of depression, or you’ve taken that journey with family members or friends, you understand this. You can do all the encouraging you want but if the answer is “why bother, why bother?” “Why work this hard if I look to the future and there's no hope?” It doesn’t matter how much encouraging you do.   How many kids are in your program like that? Why bother going to the weight room, they are never going to play me. Why bother doing this stuff, nobody sees it. Your job, the two-fold job you have as a coach, is to put courage in, and give them hope in the future. We are in a world in desperate need of hope. Temporal and eternal. 

Why bother getting a degree? I live in a neighborhood where all my friends get killed or the older people I know are in jail.  Why bother? That's what I see for the future.  First of all you need to speak hope into their lives. There are reasons to bother because it's what you become, not just what you achieve. If all we are, are “results” coaches, this gets tough. If we are process coaches, we find things all along the way. Here's why bother. Because I don't want you quitting here because I don't want you quitting in school. And I don't want you quitting in relationships later. And I don't want you to quit on your job. So we are not going to quit here! You are going to persevere. Here's why I want you to tell the truth here. Here's why we don't teach kids to flop in basketball on this team. I'm not going to say anything about the other teams but I'm going to tell you, we don't do that because that's just deception for personal gain. That's selfish. You're trying to steal something from somebody else. We don't do that here because there is no difference between doing that and cheating on your test in class. There's no difference in cheating on your job, cheating on your spouse if you get married, we are not going to do it here. Because we are going to speak to the future with hope. That's your job as a coach. To speak hope in to them and to put courage in and create that environment.

There may be no higher calling than to coach.  But the forces conspiring to keep things the way they are, constantly pressure us.  We’ve been walking a journey of re-thinking, it’s now time we round the bend and formulate an accountable plan of action.
