It was the spring of 1982. My older brother Jason just had his first tee-ball practice of the year, and during that practice, the coach was nice enough to let me play with older kids. I was only four, but I must’ve impressed him! After practice, I saw coach talking to my dad, and it obviously about me. On the ride home, my dad went on to tell that coach said, “Hey, if we are ever short a player, maybe Wes could fill in for that game.” Enough said. I was pumped. From that point on, I was anxiously waiting on that phone call to come in. Finally, after what seemed like an eternity of waiting, at least two weeks, I got “THE CALL” I’d been waiting for. My call up from the minors. I distinctly remember that first game digging into that batter’s box, lining up my bat a few times, and then SMOKING THE BALL… right back to the pitcher. I remember beating out the throw at first… that went over the fence. Everyone scores in tee-ball remember? I remember as I rounded third, the feeling of PRIDE that welled up in me as I crossed home plate, went to the dugout and slapped my six year-old brother’s hand in celebration. My athletic career had officially begun. I WAS AN ATHLETE. At least in my mind. 

Sports quickly became the thing in this world that began shaping my identity. For the communities that I found myself to be a part of, I was always one of the better athletes. I wasn’t just Wes Simmons, I was Wes Simmons the “jock.” Sport wasn’t merely what I DID, it became WHO I WAS.
Now, think about that statement. Sport became the THING that began shaping my identity. That’s problematic. Any temporal THING, whatever the “thing” may be, that tries to act as the foundation for our lives, will eventually prove itself faulty. For me, that foundation began to crumble my second year as a student-athlete in college. 

Most of that year went GREAT! During the season, we went 12-1 and we made it to round 2 of the playoffs. Eligibility-wise, it was my freshman year, and I got significant playing time as a second-stringer behind a senior on the team. I knew heading into that off-season, if I could stay healthy and beat out any would-be challengers to my starting job, I would be a 3 year starter on a team that looked positioned to win a lot of games. We had just finished spring practice, and we were about two weeks away from summer break, and my plan was to stay there all summer and get after it in the weight room, preparing for the upcoming season. Life was good.

April 22, 1998. April 22, 1998 was an incredibly beautiful spring day. It was like one of those postcards you buy on vacation and mail home to make your friends and family jealous. The sky was clear, blue and warm, with a few perfect, puffy white clouds. You could feel the sun shine hot, on your face. Spring was in the air and joy was in my heart. But… as the sun went down on that day, the only way I can describe it, is that the sun went down on my soul. Right around the stroke of midnight, I received another call… only this time it was that call that everyone DREADS to get. It was my dad. He went on to tell me that my older brother Jason, had earlier been in a head on car crash. Though it wasn’t fatal at that moment, the issue really wasn’t would he live, or would he die… barring some miracle, that fate seemed to be sealed. The only question was, would I be able to make the drive home in time to see him BEFORE he died?
I raced home, and when I got there I found my brother barely hanging on to life.  As I grabbed his hand, the reality of it all came crashing into my soul, like a wrecking ball.  His face was almost unrecognizable due to the injuries he sustained in the wreck, I recognized that hand.  That was the same hand that I slapped after I got my first hit in t-ball when I was 4 and he was 6. That was the same hand that used to “lovingly” punch me in the arm as a kid. At a loss for words, I simply opened my mouth and spoke from the heart. Three things came out that night. First, I told him that I loved him. Regretfully, that may have been the only time in my life that I ever told him that with any REAL intentionality… that MOM didn’t make me say it, that I loved him. I could only hope he heard me, I believe he did. I’ve learned that lesson. The second thing I told him was not “Good bye”, but I told him I would see him again. I held to that hope, and I continue to hold to that hope. Number 3? Because my identity was so completely wrapped up in sports, all I knew to do was commit the great cause of my life to him, and I pledged to him, on his deathbed, that we would win the national championship in his honor that following year.  And then… he passed away. 

A few days later at the funeral, I began to learn a lesson that has stayed with me to this day. It has to do with what we talked about. I call them the Funeral Topics. Really, they are the only two things that people talk about at almost every funeral that I’ve ever been to… because they are really the only things that truly matter. First, we talked about RELATIONSHIPS. Who were the relationships that he had and had given his life to? Who did he love, and who loved him. His faith, his family, his friends. Relationships.  And how did he express that love to others in a cause that was greater than himself? We call that a transcendent cause. We talked about his legacy, and his intent to be a math teacher and a coach after he graduated college. The second Funeral topic is the “Transcendent Cause” that someone gave their life to, or for. Although Jason’s life was tragically cut short, his legacy lives on, even as I share this story. 
Coaches, can we open our eyes, and have enough foresight to recognize that at the end of life, the funeral topics are the only things that truly matter? If we can be intentional with this powerful position called “coach”, we can be confident that at the end of our lives, the funeral topics will be shared with words of celebration… because we left an incredible legacy of transforming lives. But it takes great intentionality of purpose.
