At Jason’s funeral, I’ll never forget the comfort that I experienced when busload, after busload of teammates, coaches, teammate’s families, coach’s families, professors, fans… all of the people who were either directly or indirectly involved in that program, showed up… in support of me. I’d bet that most of them didn’t know my brother personally per se’, but they showed up in support of me, because of the family environment that the coaches created on our team. I’m so thankful that I had a 3Dimensional Coach, who used his position of authority to create an environment where relationships flourished. Because they rallied around me, it helped me find healing for my broken heart at a very difficult time in my life. But they didn’t just rally around me at the funeral, together we rallied as a team that whole summer. It became a local story that I had dedicated the 1998 season to my brother’s memory, and my brothers on the team had my back. We sold out. In fact, we went 15-0 that next year and won the national championship!

Doesn’t it seem like that’s a common scenario in sports? Someone on a team dies, or close to the team dies, the team rallies, and they go on and do incredible things as cohesive unit, united in purpose. This is the stuff our favorite sport movies consist of. It doesn’t always have to do with death necessarily, but some sort of adversity strikes, and the team comes together. Have you ever thought about WHY that is? I submit that it’s because, when life reigns down blows of adversity on a community, people begin to open up their hearts to one another. When we open our hearts, what comes out is THE GREATEST MOTIVATIONAL FORCE IN THE UNIVERSE. Mark talked about this earlier… it’s the force of LOVE. This is so obvious, it should be self-evident. If Mark didn’t convince you in the session on Character, then maybe this will. Think about it. You will do more for people you love, than you will for anyone else. I will endure more, and be more willing to self-sacrifice for my loved ones, than I will for anyone else. I’m not going to just selflessly give up one of my TWO kidneys for anyone that is in need, but I wouldn’t hesitate if it were my wife or kids. Love is the most powerful motivating force in the universe!

So here’s my question: Why do we always seem to wait around for something BAD to happen, before we wake up to this reality? I’ve heard it said that the only “good” thing about death, is that it reminds us how to live LIFE. But why does it take something so tragic to wake us up and remind us of that? Why can’t we be more intentional about harnessing this power before adversity strikes? Well, we can… if we stay tuned into our purpose. Before long, we will be taking you through the exercise of WRITING your transformational purpose for coaching. But before that, it’s important that we take some time to think about the purpose of LIFE itself, so we don’t mis-spend our lives. We want to spend our lives on love, because it all adds up to love. At the end of life, if it doesn’t all add up to love, then we can be sure of this… we made an error in our calculation somewhere along the way.

In this next exercise, we want you to start getting into writing some of the types of things you want people to hear and say at your funeral.  Then, we will begin to extract some core values out of those statements that will help guide you toward the legacy you want to leave. This is your time Coach, to forecast the legacy you want to leave. 

It was said earlier in this training that real and lasting change only comes about by either WISDOM, or CRISIS. This is your time to appeal to wisdom.
