Beauty. Beautiful. Those words may have stuck out to you as rather ODD language to hear in a course designed for coaches. I get that. It’s not common language in the sports world of competition and domination. But we are being very intentional with that kind of language because we believe that 3Dimensional Coaching is essentially an art form. The program you are building Coach, truly can be a creative act, an act that flows out the depth of your own heart. That’s what makes us uniquely human. It’s something I describe as the creative force. The ability to be creative is one of the primary aspects that we possess, that sets us apart from the animals. We’ve all ourselves been uniquely created in our mothers’ wombs… therefore all of us ARE creative expressions, and as such, we all have creative potential locked up inside us. To be fully alive, and to help our athletes be fully alive, we need to figure out how to unlock that creative potential in ourselves, and in them. As coaches, we have an incredible opportunity to express that creativity in the programs we are building. What a powerful opportunity, to leave a legacy of beauty. Not the type of beauty that runs only skin deep, the type of beauty that shapes a holistic and flourishing life. Here’s what I mean.The ancient Greek philosopher Socrates famously stated that “The unexamined life is not worth living.”4 The survey of year olds that Mark referenced in the last unit validates that claim. At the end of life, people wish they would have taken better advantage of those “Kairos” moments to observe, reflect, discuss, and then adjust, or plan a new way forward. We should understand that as coaches. Think about it. When it comes to the first dimension, we enact this process all the time. After EVERY practice, in many cases, we will observe game film, reflect and discuss what worked and what didn’t, and then create a plan of improvement. But Socrates, and the roster of 95 year olds that were surveyed, implore us to not only do this with our “fundamental lives,” but with our WHOLE lives… especially those parts of our lives that matter most, like relationships!Socrates, and his contemporaries like Plato, Aristotle, and others, who had such a profound impact on the shaping of the society that actually gave us the Olympics, the origin of sport as we know it, had much to say about what makes a life truly worth living. Now, examining life is a crucial first step, but there has to be some standard to hold it up to. Some definition of what a “life done right” looks like. The greek philosophers often talked about THREE prime virtues. These three prime virtues, that need no justification beyond themselves, were the three standards that they evaluated the various aspects of their lives up against: Truth. Goodness. And Beauty.They would ask: Is it true? Is it good? Is it beautiful? In their wisdom, they knew that ALL THREE were essential. It’s like a three legged stool. You take one leg out, and it’s an unreliable standard.For example, there are lots of groups out there who claim to be all about the “Truth,” or to know the “Truth.” That same group may even have a claim on what defines “goodness” or “morality.” And they may even be right? But we’ve all seen the potential of groups like this to bludgeon people over the heads with “the truth” or seek to forcefully impose “morality” on others… and it can be extremely UGLY because it’s not shared in love or from a heart of love. That’s the role of beauty. Beauty flows from the heart and penetrates the heart of others. Where people may be suspicious of your truth claims as a coach, or combative over what you define is “good and bad”… or right and wrong, beauty has a way of flying under the radar. And the role of beauty is to attract! As you take this Kairos journey, and reenter the Chronos on a new trajectory in your coaching, the beauty of HOW you coach will attract your players, fellow coaches, parents, administrators, and fans to come with you on that journey.In his world renowned novel “The Idiot,” Russian novelist Fyodor Dostoevsky’s famously penned the line “Beauty… will save the world.”6  I agree. And as it pertains to what we are doing here… I believe that beauty can save sports. Things can get extremely ugly out there when competition gets out of hand, but as 3D Coaches, we can create beautiful pockets of “sport done right.” We will get to HOW, as artists, to create these pockets of beauty in the 3rd dimension training section of this course, but for now, it’s important that we understand why it’s essential. We also need to understand that BEAUTY has to have a FORM or framework to really even be possible. If we can understand 3D as a framework for coaching, we will in turn teach our athletes a framework for how to actually live that “life worth living” once they leave our programs. 3D is not a program. 3D is a framework, a framework for beauty.