Think of some of the ugliest moments that you’ve ever seen in sports. Coaches getting in a fistfight over a blown call in tee ball. Bench clearing brawls at a professional sporting event on “family day.” Those are a couple of the ones that pop into my mind, and I’m sure you have your own version of them in yours. Now contrast that with the beauty of what it could have looked like if it was handled rightly by the coaches. We need coaches who are pursuing mastery at the ART of coaching.
The National Standards for Sport Coaches feature eight domains of coaching responsibilities and within them, 40 standards and benchmarks that represent the body of knowledge coaches need to be proficient at to be successful. Before they get into all the domains, IN THE OPENING STATEMENT, it reads, and I quote: “Many people have suggested that coaching is as much an art, as it is a science.”7  Yes. That is what we are suggesting. We want coaches to be authentic artists who create pockets of beauty, as they create team cultures that are life giving to all involved. The problem is, we have too many knock-off artist coaches who are simply parroting what has been modeled for them. Now, that CAN be a good thing. But often it leads to transactional coaching that really can best described in one word: ugly. Let’s not be ugly in our expression, let’s be beautiful in our expression. 
It’s form that defines beauty. Can you imagine music without a form? I can. It sounds a lot like my kids over at grandma’s house… banging away on her out of tune piano, driving all of us adults crazy! A sculpture without a form is a blob of clay. A painting without form is a blob of paint on a canvas. Or in sports… ever heard people describe athletic performance with the phrase “poetry in motion?” It’s the movement of the athlete with perfect form, or technique, that elicits this type of praise. It’s form that defines beauty. The question is, do you have a form, or FRAMEWORK for your coaching philosophy? What holds your creation all together? That’s what 3D is. It’s a framework.
One more illustration. Imagine with me that you are an interior designer who works for some architect firm or something. Now, if you are like me, that’s quite a stretch of the imagination… but just go with me for a minute. What serves as the canvas for your creative expression? Well, it’s the interior walls, and interior design features of the home… right? But for you to even have a reliable canvas to express your creativity, those interior walls and design features need to be supported by a framework. It’s the stud walls, the floor joists, the overhead rafters, the door and window headers… it’s the FRAMEWORK that holds it all together. The framework allows you to creatively express. That’s a great picture of what 3D is. A framework. It’s a skeletal structure that supports something. In this case, it supports all that you are trying to accomplish as you build your program. 
On the first floor, are the fundamentals. This first floor is essential, because it contains the skills & strategies that most kids and parents want to improve upon as they enter into your program. The fundamentals are first and foremost, at least when it comes to most people’s initial expectations. But don’t stop there… give them a guided tour of the whole house. The second floor is where we develop our relational strategies. This is the floor where coaches and athletes connect relationally and grow in unity. Here we help them understand proper motivation, confidence, and emotions. We have fun on this floor. And the third floor is the highest in the structure. Now, it’s not necessarily higher in the sense that it is MORE IMPORTANT than the others, all THREE are essential. Without the first two, there is no third floor. But this is where we help our fellow coaches and athletes remember the HIGHER purpose of everything we are doing, as it pertains to life beyond the game. When I first got into coaching… I didn’t know that there was a third floor. I didn’t have a framework that helped me see it that way.
But what good is a structure or framework, if it isn’t able to stand against pressure?  You can count on it… the pressures that we face as coaches in the 21st century ARE going to stress and strain this house we are building. The storms of life are going to come, the winds of adversity will blow and the rivers of tribulation will rise. If we want our program to withstand these storms, the framework is essential … yes… but only if it is built on a solid foundation. Every sturdy framework needs a solid foundation.
As you work through the modules in this course, we are going to help you lay a solid foundation. This is a critical step not to be overlooked. Our shortcuts will most likely lead to setbacks. If we don’t do the hard work of defining WHY we are coaching before we start implementing a bunch of 2nd or 3rd dimension strategies… it will likely collapse. Coaches will try to USE strategies to improve performance, and they will stay committed to it as long as they “work.” But as soon as they don’t provide the immediate success they anticipated, they will abandon the framework because “it doesn’t work.” No, as Jeff showed us according to research in the first unit… IT WORKS. We may not be very good at it yet, but it works… as long as it’s built on a solid foundation. The solid foundation for the 3D framework IS the coach’s TRANSFORMATIONAL PURPOSE STATEMENT. When we know WHY we are doing what we are doing, we will persevere through those storms and stay committed to the 3D process. 
All of that is to say this… don’t try to use the 3D framework for transactional purposes. Use it for transformational purposes in the lives of those you lead. But remember this… the wellspring for the transformation in your players has to flow from right here first. This is our journey to take first. 
Alright, enough of the philosophical background about WHY this course is structured the way it is, but it was important to start with the WHY. Now we’re ready to get into some powerful second dimension content. Are you ready to jump in to this Kairos journey with both feet? Let’s commit to going through the whole process, so that once we hit the finish line of this course, it actually serves as starting line for a life of incredible legacy you will leave from that point forward. 
