“Coach says.” Two of the most powerful words in the lives of a young athlete. We need to be careful with our words, because we never know what is going to stick! As I think back, I can immediately recall some of the words my coaches spoke to us, from over 20 years ago mind you! I can distinctly remember Coach Bonuchi teaching this simple, yet powerful, 3-word phrase that stays with me to this day: Expect to Win. Those 3 simple words began to shape a mindset in each of us, and over time, with HARD WORK, they began to transform our program. Not only that, but they still give me confidence to this day! My college coach, Coach Tjeerdsma, used to always say at practice, every day it seems, “Don’t believe the lie that you are staying the same. You are either going THIS WAY, or THIS WAY.” That lesson has carried on with me to this day as well. What a powerful lesson that is too, especially as I apply that to my relationships. My relationship with my wife, or my kids, is either going THIS WAY, or THIS WAY, and it’s MY responsibility to make sure it’s going in the right direction. A lesson about “no complacency” in sports has translated to “no complacency” in my most meaningful relationships.

Other words, and lessons I’ve learned from some of my coaches over the years, I won’t repeat here. I’d  do well to forget some of those! The point is, let’s be careful with our words, we never know what is going to stick with our athletes… forever. 

Here’s another one that has stuck, but it didn’t come from one of my athletic coaches. It came from one of my life coaches. One of my mentors. It has to do with the topic at hand: wisdom. One day, in a casual conversation, almost in passing he said: “wisdom is the ability to see the end result of present action.” Boom. That stuck. I don’t know that you will find that definition in some dictionary somewhere next to the word “wisdom,’ but what a great working definition. Wisdom is our ability to SEE the END result of present action. 

Many of us are likely familiar with the famous adage “hindsight is 20/20.”  That may be true, but I also know this is true… we sure do forget a lot. But the truth that is there is probably a result of the truth that’s expressed in another famous adage…the one that says, “experience is the best teacher.” Experience MAY be the best teacher, but it’s not necessarily always the most pleasant way to learn! As some have noted, the problem with this approach is that the test comes before the lesson and the price of tuition is usually much more than we want to pay!  But does it have to be that way? Do we have to learn every lesson the hard way? Is it possible to have some 20/20 FORESIGHT, and avoid some of the hard lessons we face in life? We don’t HAVE to pay those high prices if we can learn to SEE the end result of present action. In other words, we need to operate in wisdom.
Legendary NCAA Division III Coach Frosty Westering, who passed away in April of 2013, had one of those sticky one liners.  Though I never had the opportunity to meet Coach Westering, and lived thousands of miles away, his influence indirectly has had a great impact on my life. That’s the power of the coaching platform.

“Make the big time where you are.” That was his phrase. Make the big time, where you are. He used to say things like, “The big time isn’t about a status, or level, or place… it’s a state of the mind, and you can make the big time right where you’re at. 

Long before I knew that phrase originated with Coach Westering, that phrase was common to me.  You see, one of my former college coaches came from a school that used to be in the same conference as Frosty. That motto was somehow picked up by my coach, and he brought it from the west coast, into the middle of the country. For over 17 years as an assistant at the same program, Coach Bostwick lived that motto out. He, like Frosty, had numerous opportunities to move up to the next level, but he passed on those. He lived it out… all the way to the end, an end that came all too soon. About a week before he turned 50, my former coach and friend passed away from a heart attack while mowing his lawn. It shocked our community. Because his influence was so big, the celebration of his life had to be held here, and these stands were packed out with heartbroken friends, family members and fans. As we talked about the funeral topics, the theme of his life emerged:
“Make the big time where you are.”

You see, Coach Bostwick was clear on his core value of prioritizing relationships over status, titles, levels or money. Don’t hear me wrong… there is nothing wrong with taking another job or getting a promotion if it’s the right move for you and your family. But he had a great thing going here, and he knew it. That’s what drove his loyalty for all of those years. He had as much, maybe more to do with creating the family atmosphere I experienced as a player and coach, as anyone else. He made the big time where he was at.
Vision is the key to living a life of values. When we know the end we’re after, it makes it much easier to navigate the decisions in the present.  That’s why we had you write out YOUR ultimate preferred vision of the future, and forecast your legacy by writing your eulogies. What we see, is what we will pursue. Vision determines values, and values impact decisions and behavior in the present. Let’s walk life’s road with wisdom.
