In an earlier session, Jeff talked about the “blind obedience” generation. It used to be, by and large, that kids just did what authority figures said, because they were authority figures. Period. Now, that is a blanket statement that surely didn’t apply to ALL kids, but for the most part it’s the way it was. Not anymore. Not in the 21st Century, and as coaches today, this can be extremely frustrating. Times may have changed, but we still need to have rules on the team and they need to be enforced. Just because times have changed certainly does NOT mean that kids don’t need boundaries in their lives. In reality, they need them NOW more than EVER! Whether they know it or not, they, like all of us, want healthy boundaries in our lives, because boundaries actually create freedom. 

I was one of those kids who didn’t do well with rules. Now, if someone could explain to me WHY the rules were in place, I would usually comply, but if they couldn’t… I didn’t always. So how do we as coaches deal with kids like I was? Well… first of all, I just gave you one helpful tip. Help athletes understand WHY rules exist. For the most part, rules should be in place for the purpose of protecting relationships… and the better athletes understand this, the better chance they will comply. But here’s another way to help athletes embrace boundaries. I call it “Visionary Restraint.” Rules can be a restraint… but I think that vision can act as a MORE powerful restraint in people’s lives. As a key influencer in the lives of your athletes, you can help them see a vision for their lives beyond the playing field. This is important because, if kids don’t know where they are going, all roads look good to them.
We can have team rules that say “don’t go down the drinking road,” or “don’t go down the road of doing drugs.” Don’t, don’t, don’t, don’t, don’t. But what if we helped them see the road that we DO want them to go down? If we can help athletes see a preferred vision of their future, they are more likely to choose the right path because that VISION itself acts as a powerful restraint in their lives. “I’m not going down that road or that road, they’re dead ends. I’m going down THIS road… towards my preferred vision of the future!”

The same is true for us as coaches. Our vision hopefully has enough gravitational pull to pull us in the right direction, but if we’re honest, we know it’s still easy to get off track in the day to day journey through life. We do need some guardrails…. Something to keep us from getting off course. Rules can help with that, sure. But I think Core Values, IF they are derived from our vision, are much more effective at keeping us on course. That’s what CORE VALUES are meant do. They act like guardrails to keep us out of the ditches, and headed towards our true north.

Now it’s time for you to identify, or for some of you to revisit, your highest core values.  In this next activity, you will see a list of core values to choose from.  We want you to focus on selecting no more than 3 or 4 core values. More than 3 or 4, they become easily forgettable. Core values are meant to impact behavior. If we begin to drift off course, these should IMPACT us like guard rails and push us back to center. As Ken Blanchard said, “The most important thing in life is to decide what is most important.” Let’s narrow it down to 3 or 4.

Here is my challenge: Don’t go through the motions on this. Reflect on those Eulogy’s you wrote earlier.  What core values will help guide you toward the legacy you want to leave? Take your time and think these through.  These core values will serve as the backbone to your very own transformational purpose statement when we take that next step in the next session.
