Not long ago, I was leading a group of coaches through the exercise of writing their transformational purpose statements. After the clinic, this coach I’d known for years, and a very successful coach in the area, came up to me with, sort of a troubled look on his face. I asked him what was on his mind, and he first told me… “THANK YOU.” Thank you for creating this opportunity for me to take a time out, and truly reflect on what I am doing with my life. I said, “Ahh Coach, you don’t have to thank me.” He quickly stopped me, there was more he wanted to share. He said, “I can’t wait to get home, bring my family together into our living room, look each of them in the eye, and tell them I’m sorry.” I said, “Coach, you are a great husband and father… I know that about you. Your family knows how much you love them. They adore you.” He said, “Wes, I know my family knows I love them, but I need to show them more. If I’m going to leave the legacy I want to leave, I need to change some things now. How else will I end up where I want to go if I don’t change my behavior now?” 

Wow. It was humbling to be a small part of the change that was starting to take place in his heart. Now, again, I want to stress that he was and is a good man! But he was still willing to change, because he realized that a resistance to change, is in fact a resistance to GROWTH. He had a growth mindset. As 3D Coaches, we need to be those who embrace CHANGE.

Years ago, I was introduced to this idea called the “Formula for Change.” The formula for change comes out of the business world, and was created by David Gleicher in the early 1960s, and then refined by Kathie Dannemiller in the 1980s. Here is the idea:

All real and lasting change comes as a result of this mathematical formula: C = D X V X F.S > R. Now this probably leaves some of you mathematicians out there scratching your heads, but it IS a mathematical formula. The first time I heard it explained, it was an AHA moment for me. I thought, this can be applied to ANY change I want to make in my life! Let’s unpack this a little.

Change equals Discontent TIMES Vision, TIMES first steps, and it has to be GREATER THAN resistance. If you want real and lasting CHANGE, it starts with discontent. If there is no discontent, there is no change. Here is where the math comes into it, if there is no discontent, that D becomes a ZERO. The same is true for vision and next steps. It doesn’t take a math genius to understand this, in a multiplication formula, if any of these are ZERO, the WHOLE THING is ZERO. No change takes place. When my friend, the coach I just told you about, went through our 3D training, it created discontent for him. In this case, it was healthy discontent. It helped remind him of the influence he has, and it made him want to steward that even better than he was currently. It also spotlighted the discontent he was feeling as he was trying to deal with 2nd dimension issues in his athletes, but didn’t have strategies. Then, when we got to the point of writing his eulogy, he began to write the vision for his life beyond the game, and it confirmed some changes that he needed to make, it confirmed his discontent, and discontent should help us to MOVE in a new direction, hopefully with purpose towards our vision. 

Vision is what we would see if we accomplished our purpose. Vision is about what COULD BE and SHOULD BE.  Here’s what you need to remember about Vision: It’s powerful but not that durable.  It requires articulation, attention, celebration and regular revisiting. If your vision is going to take hold, it must be memorable.  People don’t embrace a thesis, they embrace a memorable sentence. That’s why in this formula, in this 3D process, our Next First Step is to write that memorable sentence: something we call the transformational purpose statement. This can’t be a Zero either, or the whole thing is Zero. 
Change = Discontent X Vision X Next First Steps. But all of that has to be greater than RESISTANCE. Resistance always boils down to people, and in this column there are 3 types of people… those who can stop it from happening, those who can allow it to happen, and those who can MAKE it happen. Coach, you can make this happen. Your transformational purpose statement will help you govern every decision, interaction and activity in your program, and will help you overcome any resistance you may run into as you seek implement your 3D strategies, both external, and internal. Let’s take that next step, so healthy change can take place.
