In the Goals vs. Purpose teaching earlier, Jeff introduced us to four “Mindsight Questions” that help us think beyond our highest performance goals towards our highest purpose as a coach. Why do you coach? Why do you coach the way that you coach? How does it feel to be coached by you? What is your definition of success?  Through his life’s work, and through his book “InSideOut Coaching”, coach and author Joe Ehrmann has been at the forefront of helping coaches discover their higher calling in coaching, by asking these 4 questions.  His goal in doing so is to put coaches on the right track to articulating their own transformational purpose, just as he has.
As an example, Joe has settled on the following as his “Transformational Purpose Statement.”  “To help boys become men, of empathy and integrity who will lead, be responsible, and change this world for good.”  

That statement is the result of a lot of time, contemplation, trial and error, working and reworking, to get just the right verbiage that clearly articulates what he is trying to accomplish through his coaching. 
Within that statement you will find the 2 main ingredients that the funeral topics consist of…  relationships and a cause.  Also in that wording you will find Joe’s highest core values… those guard rails that enable him to act in the present so he arrives at the preferred vision of the future he wants to see.  In only 20 words, there is a definite verb, target, and outcome, clearly defined.  The verb, or action, is “to help”, “to help them become.”  The target, is the set of relationships he hopes to impact. They are “the boys” he coaches.  And the outcome contains his highest core values… his purpose is to help them become men of EMPATHY and INTEGRITY, who will LEAD, be RESPONSIBLE and change the world for GOOD. 

My “Transformational Purpose Statement” is “to inspire athletes to pursue excellence in sports and in life while enjoying the journey.”

I set out to make it 25 words or less so that way I could easily remember it.  I’ve whittled it down to 17.  This, by the way was not my first attempt.  But as I worked through the process, I tried to have definite structure too: The Verb or action – for me that word is to inspire. I like to cast vision and encourage people to dream big, to go for it, press beyond the status quo. The Target? Pretty simple… the athletes I coach. And the Outcome – I want them to pursue excellence in sports and life while enjoying the journey.  Although they aren’t as explicitly visible, this too is where my highest core values fit in.  
For me, excellence is not a core value unto itself, until I add some definition to it.  Yes I want to passionately pursue my desires with my whole heart and with a high expectation of doing things right, but the word “EXCELLENCE” means more to me than just the conventional understanding of the word.  One of the actual definitions I found is: “The quality of being outstanding or extremely good.”  
Remember Mark’s session on the good and the great? In my use of the word excellence, it represents coaches and athletes striving to be GREAT at the GOOD, and it’s in the “GOOD”, represented by that word excellence, that my core values of faith, hope, and love are nestled in, behind the scenes.  A life that’s marked by faith, hope and love is a life well lived… a beautiful life. And my fourth core value of joy is there in plain sight. Joy is the byproduct, as they learn to enjoy the journey.
Now it’s your turn coach. Try to keep it 25 words or less, so that you aren’t just committing it to paper, but so that it will be easier to commit to memory. We need this committed to memory if we stand a chance of accessing it in the heat of competition.

Make sure there is a verb, a target, and an outcome.  In your wording, make sure to use the core values themselves, or at least words that help you stay reminded of your highest core values. This statement will serve as your constant reminder of why you do, what you do.
Staying reminded of WHY, helps us to “Be the change we want to see.” If we want to BE the change we want to see, keep in mind these four “Be’s” as you complete this exercise.  Be Authentic. Be Brief. Be Deliberate. Be Structured. Let’s BE the change we want to see.
