Early on in this training we helped you see 3D not as a program, but as a framework… a framework that needs to have a solid foundation to withstand the storms of life. Coach, you’ve just laid the foundation for the 3D Framework. You’ve written your transformational purpose statement. Now it’s time to start building that house with second and third dimension strategies. But before we turn you loose on that exercise, I’d like to revisit the framework analogy one more time, but this time from a different angle. 
Think of it like this. Suppose there is a businesswoman who lives in your community. She has a young daughter, and her daughter starts expressing interest in playing volleyball with her friends. Because this mom wants THE VERY BEST for her daughter, she signs her up for a club that promises the BEST experience to train her daughter physically and get her ready for the “next level.” However, by the season’s end, the mom, and the daughter, knew they did NOT get what they had bargained for. The coach had a win-at-all-costs approach, and apparently he felt like his job was to “weed out the weak.” The girl was frustrated, and she was ready to quit … just as she was getting started. Sound familiar?
After talking to other frustrated parents, the business owner decided she was going to DO something about it, instead of just complaining about it and blaming coaches. She decides she is going to set up a storefront, a resource center, that will help train coaches to be more transformational with kids. You see, she has been very intentional about cultivating an environment where relationships flourish, at the businesses she owns. She has seen first-hand how the right culture positively effects not only performance, but raises the overall enjoyment of being on the team as well. She wants to help coaches create these types of environments too, so she starts a new business to resource & train them. We’ll say she calls it “The Coach’s Edge.” She knows coaches are always looking for the edge, so she figures this will be a good way to draw them in.

As she thinks through what “products and resources” she wants to offer, she comes up with 3 basic categories. The first category has to do with the fundamentals of the game. She has health and nutrition products, workout plans, books & DVD’s to teach skills and strategies, these types of things. She knows this is critical to helping coaches be great coaches. They have to know the game.
But she also knows that there’s more to building a great team than just the fundamentals. The second category of products and resources has to do with the SOCIAL, EMOTIONAL, and RELATIONAL part of team building. Resources that help coaches motivate kids, deal with emotions and confidence, foster team cohesion and set goals. She knows if coaches want a real edge, they better be equipped with strategies to deal with these issues of the mind.

That’s not all though. Because she saw how HEART-broken her daughter was after the season, she knew there had to be one more category. Through the course of the year, she saw her daughter’s emotions of excitement and joy deteriorated to emotions of fear and shame. Though these appeared on the surface to fit into that second category, she knew they were rooted somewhere else. She saw how her daughter began to perceive her own self-worth based on how well she performed. She saw how this coach was the one who perpetuated that lie, because that was how he related to them. It was all about performance. The business woman creates a 3rd category of products and resources to help with these issues of the heart. And within this category, there are two SUB categories… one for the COACH and his heart, and one for the TEAM, so coach can coach them up.

Now, when she opens up her storefront, is she going to just scatter all these resources on the floor randomly & unorganized? Probably not. She needs to put them on shelves. She needs a framework. That’s what 3D is… a framework. Don’t think of 3D Coaching as a “Product on a shelf.” It IS a shelf. It is an organizing framework of the mind, that allows you to now stock the shelves with the products, resources and strategies that will help you fulfill your purpose. 

Coach, remember this. To NOT coach in all 3Dimensions, is to by very definition, to NOT help your athletes be all they can be. Not only that, to NOT coach in all 3Dimenions is to NOT fulfill your transformational purpose. To truly gain “The Coach’s Edge,” you need to shop off all three shelves. Now that the foundation is intact, let’s begin browsing all THREE shelves, and selecting the right strategies off each that will help us be transformational.
