“If your outgo exceeds your income, then your upkeep will be your downfall.” A guy named Bill Earle said that in the context of money management, but it’s truth can be applied across the whole spectrum of life. In the 21st century, we need to stay reminded of this simple truth, because so much about our modern life is designed to keep us “busy” in our pursuit of “progress”, and it causes us to neglect our own souls. We need to find balance. 

How many times have you had this conversation in the last week?
You approach someone, and say something like, “Hi, how’s it going?” They emphatically reply, “Busy!”
We live in a busy age and we often embrace our busyness as a badge of honor. But should we?
Busyness can be the ultimate form of laziness if we’re honest. It can be the easiest way to give ourselves an excuse for not doing the things we know we OUGHT to do. This is especially true if those things we need to do or those changes we need to make are difficult. The demands of our schedule become a diversion tactic by which we let ourselves off the hook. Busyness is often just the mask we put on laziness

John Wooden reminds us, “Don’t mistake activity with achievement.”

Busyness is seductive because it’s driven by a supposed spirit of progress, and progress is good…right? In his wonderfully written book “In Search of Balance,” Dr. Richard Swensen does a masterful job at putting a spotlight on the unintended consequences of unfettered progress. Dr. Swensen articulates well the phenomenon that we all seem to find ourselves under the sway of in this age of fast-paced progress, something he succinctly describes as “escalation of the norm.” In other words, the phenomenon of more and more, faster and faster, and then it normalizes. Once a new normal is established, it becomes the next generation’s starting point and the cycle repeats. More and more, faster and faster, and then it normalizes. It’s the price of progress. Progress always leads to more. Always.

Progress usually starts out as very well-intended. Its design is to give people the kind of more that they want, and the kind of more that they need. But… there comes a point where more and more is NOT what we need, or things begin to break down.
There comes a time where what we need is NOT faster and faster, or the wheels come off.
We need balance. So much of coaching is going, going, going. Grinding, grinding, grinding. Giving, giving, giving. It will drain us if we let it.
Here’s the thing. We can’t impart, what we don’t possess. Or to say it another way, transformation in the lives of our athletes can really only happen out of the OVERFLOW of transformation in our own hearts first. We need strategies to make sure OUR hearts are full, and then out of the OVERFLOW of our hearts, our athletes receive what they need.

When I hear the word “Overflow,” I immediately picture a river that has been dammed up and formed into a lake. For there to be OVERFLOW, there needs to be an abundance of water flowing IN to the reservoir from somewhere upstream. If the flow of water IN stops flowing, you can forget about overflow… that’s the sign of a DROUGHT. Or in terms of coaching….Burnout. The same is true of our own hearts. We need strategies that allow streams of refreshment to flow TO our own hearts first, before we can even really concern ourselves with allowing those streams to flow THROUGH us to our athletes. We call these your “TO” strategies. Coach, what is your strategy to make sure YOUR heart is full of that which you hope to impart. Then… you can start to think about the “THROUGH” strategies that you will implement to help your athletes get what they need.  Shortly, you will begin to go shopping off of that “3rd shelf” for the strategies that will help you fulfill your purpose. But before we get to that, I want to introduce you to a “Level 3 Partner”, an organization who specializes in providing 3rd dimension opportunities for growth, both with TO strategies for you as a coach, and THROUGH strategies for your team.
