Coaches, we’ve been on a journey. We’ve helped you to OBSERVE many things that have changed the face of coaching in the 21st century, and hopefully reminded you of the incredible power you possess as a coach. We’ve caused you to REFLECT and hopefully DISCUSS the various aspects of the 2nd and 3rd dimension, so you could have a greater understanding of the 3D framework. We then helped you through a process of PLANNING, and you have now defined your transformational purpose and developed a plan to fulfill your purpose by selecting various 2nd and 3rd dimension strategies to implement in the pre-season, in-season, post-season, and off-season. Now the hard work begins… it’s time to live it out.

Too often, even our best intentions are thwarted by a failure of the will. Remember, the will is a function of the heart, so if we want to follow through on this plan we’ve created, one of the very BEST level 3 strategies for our OWN hearts is to intentionally enter into mentoring relationships. In fact, there are really 2 key mentoring relationships that each of us should have, if we truly want to maximize our impact as not only coaches, but as humans! We need to HAVE a mentor, and we need to BE a mentor.
First, we should HAVE a mentor. Let’s be intentional about seeking out that person, or those people, in our lives who are a little further down life’s path than we are. In this type of mentoring relationship, here is the agenda… to sit at their feet and learn. This relationship is not about accountability so much, it’s more about asking them to pour into you, what has been poured into them or what they have learned from their life experiences. For years now, I have met with the same man on Wednesday mornings at 11:00… for one hour, a time that works in both of our schedules. The amount of wisdom that has been poured in to me is priceless. He has helped me make sure that “I don’t have to learn every lesson the hard way.”

We also need to BE a mentor. To BE a mentor doesn’t mean you have to have life all figured out, it simply means that you are a little further down the road of life than someone else and you are willing to share with them what wisdom you have picked up along the way. Again, this isn’t so much about being “accountability partners,” it’s more about you pouring out what has been poured in. 
I certainly don’t have life all figured out, but I’ve intentionally mentored other coaches and athletes in my life. Admittedly, this one is a little harder to “Make Happen…” It’s hard to go up to someone and say, “Hey, I’m going to mentor you,” or “Can I mentor you?” This is more about simply making it known that you are available, and allow them to seek out the relationship. But, I think we have helped equip you to mentor someone else if you want to. Now that you’ve been through the 3D training yourself, you have a GREAT reason to mentor a younger coach. Seek out a younger coach, take this 3D journey with him/her. Be a conversation partner as you help someone else on the journey. You will benefit greatly as well. There is NO WAY you picked everything that was taught in this course. Who is that person in your life who you can pour into what has been poured into you? And who are YOU going to now go seek out to pour into YOU what’s been poured into him or her? Take a few moments and get those names down in writing now. This is a key step towards truly changing your trajectory as you re-enter the CHRONOS timeline.
