By this point in the course, hopefully you are highly motivated to pursue and persist towards the end of fulfilling your transformational purpose. You have your “WHY” clearly articulated, you have a bunch of strategies that you are going to go implement, and you are ready to sprint ahead towards that preferred vision of the future. It’s great to continue cultivating that 20/20 FORESIGHT that we talked about earlier, and to see with clarity that end you are after… but we all still have blind spots. If we could see all of our own blind spots, they wouldn’t be blind spots! I’m talking about the various obstacles and distractions that you WILL encounter as you come off this mountain top and start migrating towards the vision. THEY ARE A PART OF THE JOURNEY, which is why we can’t go it alone. We need HAVE mentors, those that are further down the path that can pass on wisdom and perspective to us. We need to BE mentors… and help someone else on the journey who is coming behind us. But we also need some traveling companions. Some people who are at that same stage on the journey as we are, and keep us reminded that the journey is WORTH IT and we need to PERSEVERE and keep going. In other words, we need some up close and personal ACCOUNTABILITY.

Accountability means that we will be responsible to somebody for something or some action. And we all need accountability… desperately! Why?
Who is the easiest person to let down? Yourself. Ourselves. But remember, because of the influence of the coaching platform, letting yourself down is equate able to letting many others down as well.  We can’t afford that. 

We need to find people who care enough about US, who won’t let us do that. We need to find the people who will hold us accountable to live out our transformational purpose, but we need to give them permission to hold us accountable. Accountability doesn’t just happen.  It is sought out, and permission is given among trusted friends.  In my own life, I have asked people I know and trust to hold me accountable. For this to be effective though, they have to feel free to ask me the hard questions… and mine do! But you know what? That accountability is one of the greatest sources of FREEDOM I have in my life. I’m better able to avoid the pitfalls and snares when I know someone will be questioning my motives, challenging my decisions, critiquing my behavior… out of a heart of love. 
From my experience, accountability is the key that separates the wishers in life, from the action takers. It serves as a bridge from “Commitment” to actual “Results.” Be reminded of the formula for change. This is the NEXT STEP towards your vision…. To create an accountability structure in your life. Operate with wisdom, and see the beautiful end result of this present action. Don’t be that person in your own life that “STOPS” change from happening by refusing the blessing of accountability. Identify those who you can TRUST and those who will help you MAKE IT HAPPEN.
