Not long ago, a report called the “Hardwired to Connect” study, was released by a group called the “Commission on Children at Risk .” This commission consisted of 33 children’s doctors, research scientists, mental health experts and youth service professionals. These researchers concluded that much of what is causing the crisis for our youth today is a lack of meaningful relationships that have any real depth. All of our technological advances, which have many great benefits, also have many unintended consequences. Left to itself, technology encourages us to exchange real and meaningful relationships, for inch-deep connections. In a sad twist of irony, all of our “social media” is producing a generation of socially defunct kids… and adults!

The Hardwired to Connect report makes a compelling case that young people have three basic needs that must be met if they are to grow into flourishing healthy adults.
Number one: They need an authority figure to believe in them and validate their INHERENT worth and value. Coach, that’s why we’ve helped you to define your transformational purpose… to serve as a constant reminder for you to value your players not based on WHAT they do or how well they perform in the 1st dimension, but based on WHO they are.

Number two: Kids need a belief system that gives them purpose and meaning in life. They need mentor’s in their lives that will help them make sense of their existence. 

And number three: They need a place to belong, a base community. A community that is founded ON a belief system, that has healthy boundaries that help them navigate adolescence into adulthood. 
The bad news is, many of our kids aren’t getting these things at home. The good news is, the program you are building, if you are intentional, can help provide these three basic needs in the lives of the kids you coach. Realize this. There has never been a more difficult time to coach than it is in the 21st century. Most of us didn’t sign up to be a surrogate mom or dad to the kids who sign up for our programs, but that’s the role we inherited in many cases. But, I hasten to add this. There has never been a more REWARDING time to coach than right now either, if we can fulfill our transformational purpose. We can know we are operating in our purpose when our greatest passions meet the actual needs of others. Kids have a NEED for community, you have a passion to build a team. Let’s connect the dots here and be intentional about building it in the right way.

In chapter 6 of InSideOut Coaching by Joe Ehrmann, Joe helps us see that a Team is really a synonym for a Community. He gives some GREAT insight to how in their program, they intentionally built a group of individuals into a “Community with a Cause.” They identified three primary virtues that helped them form the core of their community, or team: Liberty, Respect and Moral Courage. I highly recommend reading that book to gain a lot of great new strategies, especially that have to do with the third dimension attributes of the heart. But for now, I’ll leave you with this quote from Joe out of the book to spark your imagination of what could be.

He said, “We envisioned creating a TEAM WITHOUT WALLS. A community in which there were no obstacles to becoming a team member.” He later went on to teach us that “Community” comes from the Latin word Communitas. Com means “with” or “together” and the root word munus means “gift.” Community literally means to gift one another. A team without walls is a group of individuals who gift to each other a basic need that ALL of us have… the need for authentic community.
