As you should understand well by now, 3Dimensional Coaching is not about immediate results per se’, it’s about long-term athlete development. If someone were to ask us, “Hey Coach, how is your season going?” Our response should sound something like, “I’m not sure yet. I’ll tell you in about 20 years.” THAT determines the long range success of our programs, when we are able to discern what kind of wives/husbands, mothers/fathers, business leaders, employees, public servants, or volunteers our athletes become. Our programs should act like SLINGSHOTS that propel our athletes into life on a healthy trajectory. We want them to be contributing members of THEIR community after their playing days are over. While we have them in OUR community, we have the opportunity to MODEL what a healthy community looks like. If we do this right, we will send them forth and help SHAPE their communities, as they step into leadership roles later in life. 

Robert Waldinger is the director of the Harvard Study of Adult Development. This is an amazing study that has been going for over 75 years! For 75 years, they have tracked the lives of 724 men, and now they are beginning to study the lives of more than 2,000 children of these men. Why? They are seeking to better understand, what are the key ingredients that go into building a long-lasting and fulfilling life? Not surprisingly, the clearest message they are getting from this 75 year study is simply this… Good relationships keep us happier and healthier. Relationships. One of the funeral topics.

The study reveals that the experience of loneliness turns out to be toxic… literally. Those who are isolated find their physical health declining earlier in life, their brain functioning declines sooner and they live shorter lives than people who are not lonely. On the other hand, the study reveals that those who are tied into community… are more socially connected to family and friends… tend to not only be happier, but physically healthier too. But it’s not just about surrounding ourselves with a bunch of people. Some of my loneliest moments have been amongst a crowd of strangers! And ONLINE relationships don’t count. You can have a million social media friends, and still feel lonely.  It’s about surrounding ourselves with our own base community. We need to be face-to-face with others, and it has to go beyond mere “networking.” Your network may be able to help you find a job, but will those people help you through the storms of life?

Here is my challenge to you Coach, seek to establish another layer of accountability in your life by getting connected to a thriving community. Yes, your work environment and the team you are building can be a great source of this type of community… no doubt. But what happens if you leave that team for one reason or another? Or, let’s look at it from a different angle… suppose you “make the big time where you are,” and you coach there all the way to your deathbed! That’s probably unlikely, but possible. We never know when our last day is, as one of my coaches found out. But even if that IS the case, don’t allow that sports community to be the ONLY source of community you have in your life. I know a coach who was thriving in his relationships at work and in his team… but you know what? His wife and kids weren’t benefitting from that. I challenged that coach to get plugged in to other sources of community for the benefit of his family.

The point is this. Yes, we need to create community in our programs… but we also need to seek it outside of the sporting environment too. You need a place to go where you are known, not primarily as “COACH”, but by your first name. Not merely for what you do, but for who you are as UNrelated to sport. Not only does it make practical sense if we want to live a healthy and fulfilling life, but with this type of intentionality we will be sure to lead our families well AND model for our players that we DO have a life beyond the game.
