Defining Motivation – A huge part of our job as coaches is to motivate players. Motivation is defined as the inclination to pursue and persist in the journey towards a desired outcome.  “I want it… and I want to stay after it.” We know this, if you get a motivated athlete, it leads to the desired outcomes we identify.  We know that today many athletes will quit on you in a heartbeat if things are not going their way.  So many athletes are motivated by these three things.  They will continue to pursue and persist as long as; 1.  “I get to play the position I want to.” 2.  “I get lots of playing time.” And number 3.  If playing on this team allows me to get to the “next level”.  This is underscored by many parents who are always trying to get their kids to play ‘up’ to the next level and somehow hoping there is a scholarship at the end of the rainbow.  Now, there’s nothing wrong with wanting to play a certain position, and nothing wrong with wanting to be a starter, and it is really cool if you actually receive some type of financial aid to play sport in college.  But when these are the primary drivers, we’re setting ourselves up for failure.  Why?  In a performance based culture of sport, not everyone can play certain positions, not everyone can play all the time and reality, only a select few go to the ‘next’ level.  This recipe of motivation will lead to frustration, anger, disappointment and eventually quitting.  A term that we cannot stand in sport, ‘quit’…  The opposite of pursue and persist.  Why is this so widespread in sport?  Well, that’s what entitlement does.  For two generations we have lived in some of the most affluent societies in the history of this world.  We now begin to measure our success as related to things like money, power, prestige, possessions, etc., and through mass media that message is spread to the ends of the earth. What should be deemed as blessings because of the so called “good life,” we now think we are owed these things. I read recently that if your family makes $30,000 a year, you live in the top 4% of the adult population on this planet.  In America, how many think that we are Kings and Queens with 30,000 dollars a year as a family?  Not many of us. And because this is two generations in, many of the athletes and their parents are showing up in sport, wanting an identity of performance, and carrying with them the internal mindset of entitlement.  Remember, sport is where we spend the majority of our discretionary time with our kids today.  Now you see the collision… entitlement and identity in sport… and only one person gets to try to figure this out. You, the coach! You just want motivated athletes and parents to pursue it persist.  The question is what are they pursuing and persisting towards?  Folks ask me all the time, “Is this a socioeconomic issue?  Do you coach the rich family in a different than the poor family?” The answer is an emphatic no!  It seems that those who have a lot have such a desire to maintain or to get more, and those who have little seem to have a great motivation to acquire that which they don’t have.  They both are motivated from entitled perspective.  So what are we to do?  I’m not a trained psychologist, I just want a coach…  Me too!  Now let’s clinic in a second dimension issue.
To be a good coach we must identify the areas that trigger us to know we HAVE a motivational problem.  As I say, we must be able to identify the things that are wrong and correct them just like we do in the first dimension.  If I recognize poor throwing mechanics, I must be able to identify the issue before I can correct it.  This works in every area of the second dimension as well.  So what are traits that will allow me to see the issue at hand is a motivational issue, second dimension.  Here are evidences of HIGH motivation:
1.)	The athlete arrives on time for training
2.)	The athlete’s equipment is in good shape
3.)	The athlete has good time-management skills
4.)	The athlete is always ready to try something new
5.)	The athlete is willing to memorize
Or, on the flip side, these can be framed in the negative to illustrate what LOW motivation looks like; 1.The athlete does NOT arrive on time for training.  They seem to always be running a little late or… 2.  They seem to always have equipment issues.  “I forgot my shoes.  Does anybody know where my mouthpiece is? I seem to have lost my shin guards.” 3. There seems to be a regular conflicts with practice and other activities.  Have you ever had an athlete that seems like they always have to go to a dentist appointment?  It seems they have more dentist appointments than there are dentists in town. 4.  Though they have a good skill level, they never seem to step up when you need someone to demonstrate. You’re always having to call them out to step up.  “Johnny get in the front line, quit hiding in the back.” Or number 5.  You teach them something on Tuesday and it seems like by Thursday they already have forgotten it. Now notice, it can be any one of these on a regular basis. These should be a trigger when I see them. The issue is not about me teaching them about the sports skill itself, rather what’s going on in their mind.  There’s a saying going around so many schools that I hear from coaches all the time.  Why can’t we get “so and so” to come out and if be a part of our team (pursue)?  Or why does it seem that kids get bored and lose their motivation (persist)?  Maybe we’re struggling on the best ways to MOTIVATE.  Let’s look at real solutions to a real problem.
