All coaches want motivated athletes.  So the question becomes what are the best motivational strategies?  Well, if we follow the culture it has to be about getting something for playing sport.  And that is the tragic part.  Most coaches think the best way to motivate athletes is to always promote getting them something externally, or called extrinsic motivation.  Extrinsic motivation occurs when the inclination to pursue and persist is imposed by external factors. Often times, these external factors are negative, things like threats of punishment, or coercion. But they can be positive external factors like scholarships and trophies. While scholarships and trophies CAN be positive, in an entitlement culture they can quickly become negative. Don’t get me wrong, there’s nothing wrong with receiving recognition for doing well, but when it becomes the primary source of motivation these externals have to be increased and increased and increased and it comes to a point of just being ridiculous.  Extrinsic motivation comes about by three things that happen; 1.  The athlete and parent (remember we have to coach two generations) are always told you ought to get something for playing sport well.  These external factors then become the main driver to motivate athletes. 2.  When these externals are constantly put as the reason for playing sport, the athlete and parent internalize this and now think “this is why I play sport.” 3.  This leads to where both the athlete and parent identify that sport is played to validate themselves for some type of external rewards.  The problem, whatever the external reward, it’s never enough.  Let’s give three examples at three different levels of playing sport.  Level one; I was at a little league sign up a few years back, you know that time where you register, pay and then are placed on a team.  A father was registering his nine year old son, wrote a check out to the little league, and was handing it to me, a volunteer at the registration table.  His nine year old son tapped me on the shoulder, I said what can I help you with?  With all seriousness he looked at me and said how big is the trophy?  Remember, he had not even been put on a team yet.  So as a college instructor, a colleague and I did a study on awards given out at high school banquets in the post season.  We surveyed a good number of coaches that had been coaching for at least one full generation, 25 years or more.  We asked them, “How many awards did you give out at your athletic banquet at the end of the year when you first started?”  For team sports there were generally four awards given out; most valuable player, best offensive player, best defensive player, and most improved player.  Then we asked them, “How many awards do you give out now?”  Oh my they all chuckled.  Most of the time the awards line up the whole length of the head table.  We still give out those original four awards, plus junior awards, plus sophomore awards, plus freshmen awards, best citizen awards, most likely to succeed awards, captain award, best looking kid, ugliest looking kid….  Well you get the picture.  Everybody is walking out with an award.  Here is the problem with extrinsic motivation…  It is never enough!  Let’s go to that high school coach at the beginning of the school year with a mandatory meeting of players and parents.  Here’s what we say so often, “We’re glad you’re here tonight.  We want a commitment to the program.  For all you young athletes and new parents, if you will commit to the off-season workouts, be a part of our club travel team during the summer.  And if everything progresses well, by the time you are a senior we will be able to get them a…………  Scholarship!  Now, don’t get me wrong, a scholarship is awesome.  But most people do not understand the odds of getting a scholarship.  Very few, in fact. About 2 percent of high school athletes are awarded some form of athletics scholarship to compete in college.2 And only a few sports at the highest level even give full scholarships.  So coaches end up lying to 98% of the athletes and parents about a chance for a scholarship.  So why did they do that?  Because we only know how to motivate in the extrinsic, we give a promise of external motivation so that parents and kids will stay motivated.  The end result for the majority of athletes and parents and coaches is frustration, disappointment, anger and disillusionment.  Now, don’t get me wrong.  Coaches should promote their athletes for scholarships.  But there has to be a better way to motivate though since its only go to work for a small percentage.  This is one of the number one reasons why coaches will leave after 3 to 4 years.  They get frustrated with the parents’ expectations.  And the coaches created that because they didn’t have a better way to motivate.  Remember, when you motivate out of the extrinsic it is never enough.  Let’s go to the highest level of performance, the professional athlete.  Where I live, we have a particular professional athlete that told the ownership that his nine million dollar contract was not enough and needed to be raised closer to $30,000,000.  Now if it had been at the end of the contract, living in a capitalist culture I would understand.  But this was during the contract and he made innuendos that he would not come back to play unless the new demand was met.  Here’s my question.  When is nine million dollars not enough to play sport?  When you motivate out of the extrinsic it is never enough.  
A much better way to motivate is to motivate from the inside out.  Intrinsic motivation occurs when the inclination to pursue and persist is driven by an interest or enjoyment of the task itself, and exists within the individual rather than relying on external pressure.  Research indicates that intrinsic motivation leads to greater accomplishment, longer lasting and its fun.  You can tell intrinsically motivated athletes by their demeanor; it feels good, there’s a sense of internal stimulation, a sense of curiosity, novelty, and it seems to make meaning of life.  It is deeper and richer and yet costs very little.  So if this is a better way, then why don’t coaches employ this style of motivation?  Two reasons; they don’t know how and it is hard to measure in a tangible way.  In other words, you only know it’s working as you see it unfolding in the actions of pursuing and persisting throughout the course of the year.  In the next session let’s look at a principle that we can utilize to help our athletes become more intrinsically motivated.
