Peer modeling occurs when one person demonstrates a skill or task to another peer. There are two ways that peer modeling can be used to cultivate a learning environment.2 The first is where the student KNOWINGLY acts as the model and demonstrates a skill or task for the team. So after you introduce the skill set you want learned, look around on your team to those that know how to do the skill well.  And when you begin to practice the skills after you have told them what needs to be done, have the ones who know the skill actually lead that learning time.  Let the ones who know how to do it well coach the others.  You set up the parameters as far as time but you are letting those who know how to do it well help those who need help. For this type of modeling to be effective, the atmosphere needs to be very open and encouraging. Remember to empathize with your athletes. At first, it can be very uncomfortable or nerve-racking for a kid to stand up in front of their peers and demonstrate. You can help ease them into this type of peer-modeling role by having them work in one-on-one situations with teammates, or in small groups. Knowing your kids is the key, and it’s important to know them well enough to know how they will respond to being set up as the model. 

If you have a kid who you know won’t respond well to being out front yet, peer modeling can still be guided by you as the coach in a way that doesn’t necessarily set him or her up as the authority. When that athlete achieves a particular success, point out that success to the team and then ask him or her to explain to the team what process was used to succeed. Conduct an impromptu “interview,” and ask them specific questions so they in turn teach specific coaching points. These are more effective ways for kids to learn because the direct comparisons between athletes and their peers are more apparent. The situation becomes more influential and motivating.

Both of these methods are called peer modeling.  And this generation loves it.  When they see one of their own do it well they will learn it more quickly.  Notice I didn’t say pick the kids that are seniors, have the highest GPA, come from the best family’s…  No…  They just know how to do the skill well.  Watch how quickly those that don’t know the skill learn it.  See this generation has grown up being taught the concept of ‘peer pressure’.  They were taught if you hang around those that are bad you will become that which is bad.  Well the other side is just as true.  If you hang around those that are good you will become that which is good.  It’s crazy how this works.  To a first dimensional coach it looks as if they are giving up power and authority but a second dimensional coach understand that we are motivating the mind to do well as related to others.  I remember our oldest son was in early elementary and was having troubles demonstrating good manners.  We live in the south.  Our culture is we like our children to say yes ma’am, no ma’am, yes sir, no sir and thank you.  He was going through the ya ya stage.  When authority figure asked him to do something he might say Yah or nay.  It was bothering me as I seemed not teach him this cultural respect.  My wife and I left for a weekend trip and had to leave our son with another family.  The other family were good friends who also had a child about our son’s age.  We left on a Friday, got home Sunday evening.  When we picked our son up he looked at the mother of the home he had stayed out for the weekend and said to her” thank you ma’am for letting me stay with you”.  I looked at my wife with quizative eyes.  The next morning as he was leaving to go to school, he turned his mother and said, ‘thank you for making the breakfast’.  Now you have to understand.  This was no special breakfast.  It was the usual ‘hurry up and get dressed, you’re going to be late for school’ breakfast…  May be toast jelly and juice.  But he was appreciative and thankful.  Where did he gain these manners?  You know the answer.  He had learned them from the other child who he had stayed with for three days.  He had learned the manners in three days that I could not teach him in three months.  Why?  Because he saw it modeled from a peer.  It works.
