If all we ever do is leader model and tell people what to do, we will create followers. Although it will take courage, preparation, and planning to use delegation as an effective developmental tool, if we can learn to delegate authority, we will create leaders. Delegating authority to the right student-leaders is the most effective way to help them make the transition from being a “peer modeler” to an intrinsically motivated “self-modeler.”

Self-modeling occurs when an athlete evaluates his/her own skill level internally. This is the most effective way to learn, and it’s critical if we are trying to motivate kids intrinsically because a self-modeling athlete is also synonymous with a self-motivated athlete! It’s even MORE critical in an entitlement culture, and we have to be more intentional now than ever about 1.) first being competent leader modelers, 2.) creating opportunities for peer modeling in the team setting, with the hopes that 3.) kids learn to be self-modelers, or self-motivated. Here’s why. Obviously, as I’ve already talked about how the affluence and entitlement that we are experiencing societally plays a major role in undermining intrinsic motivation, because it becomes all about the “stuff”. But it has also fostered a culture where the “helicopter approach” to scheduling and micromanaging all of our kid’s activities from a very early age is becoming more and more common, and this is having a number of unintended consequences.
Boston College researcher Dr. Peter Gray has documented well and written about often that there is a reason why kids are less resilient, more anxious, and more depressed than ever, and there is a strong correlation tied directly to the lack of free play kids are experiencing. If we want intrinsically motivated athletes, those who are self-motivated to pursue and persist, they need to be resilient, but research shows they are less resilient than ever. Why? Well, let’s think about it.

Depriving kids of opportunities to play on their own, away from any direct adult oversight, also deprives them of the opportunity to experience any sense of autonomy, which is one of the three key ingredients of intrinsic motivation.5 Kids spend more hours per day, more days per year, and more years of their life in school than ever before. Then, outside of school, they are in that same kind of adult-controlled setting more than ever as well, whether it be sport, youth group, clubs or other activities. In all of these scenarios, the common denominator is this: adults are in control… not the kids.6 
We have raised a generation of young people who have not been given the opportunity to problem solve, to get into trouble and find their own way out, to experience failure and realize that it’s not the end of the world, to be called names by their peers and learn how to work it out without adult intervention. Then, when they show up in our programs, is there any wonder why they are unable or unwilling to take responsibility for themselves? It’s like they need an adult to tell them what to do in every situation, because that is what they have had throughout their whole lives! It sucks the internal drive right out of them and they lose their would-be passion to pursue mastery. Let’s be intentional about cultivating intrinsic motivation by effectively using ALL THREE levels of modeling. Peer-modeling and self-modeling aren’t being learned on the playgrounds because the playgrounds are empty! Adult-leader modelers are running the show elsewhere, so let’s be intentional about helping them learn to be self-modelers in our programs.
