OK, let’s clinic. If the athlete has the physical ability to do the skill but is now struggling to do it well, you probably have a confidence issue. “He used to throw strikes at will and now can’t get it over the plate,” “What has happened to her serves? She used to be able to place her serve anywhere on the court.” “He can’t hit the blind side of a barn, he used to have such an eye for the basket.” These are all common phrases where we identify the problem, and the majority of coaches will try to fix it only in the first dimension. And by the way, you should always be about reaffirming proper techniques in the first dimension. But the problem is a lacking of belief. As we said earlier, it is easy as coaches to see the problem (fan) but now we must have the solution for the future (coach). Have you had a parent come up to you and say, “My son or daughter has lost their confidence!” I’m telling you almost anyone can see the problem even the parent. So how do you regain ‘belief’ as you continue working reaffirming first dimension teaching. Three things have to take place; 1. You have to take the athlete back to past successes. 2. You must let the athlete watch a similar skill set of success by others. 3. And there has to be a constant encouragement from all those around the athlete. Folks, this works but it is so hard to do in our culture. Think about it; past successes, others succeed, verbal encouragement. We now live in a culture that seems to celebrate; past failures, watching others fail, and ‘dissing’ or reducing others. See, in a culture of entitlement that affects all strata of the socioeconomic culture we create a comparative norm, that is, the need for more. And we know that it never is enough. So our own success maybe didn’t measure up to our own expectations, or others always seem to have more, which makes me then become a person of discouragement as related to others. Have you seen the majority of reality television shows? Are they about success or failures? We now have more shows based on watching others fail? We seem to celebrate the tearing down or reducing others. Have you seen the tabloid headlines in the little magazines at the checkout of the grocery store? The majority are about which famous person has gained the most weight, or is on drugs, alcohol dependency and unwanted pregnancy. And we celebrate these as if it’s to be revered. I remember early on in my teaching career going to the teachers’ lounge during lunch. Have you heard the majority of the conversations? It was, “How come we don’t get a raise? How come the administration doesn’t understand our toils? Parents are out of control!” On and on it went….and I would join in! How about when you go to parties? Are people talking about what is well and good in life or is the majority of conversation about what is wrong? And yet we live in the most affluent time in the history of the world. I’m telling you it’s crazy. That is why a confident mindset is so difficult for adolescents. Once they lose their confidence they do not know how to regain it. Coaches are right when they discuss how fragile the adolescent mindset is when something negative or failure shows up in their life. I hear this so many times when confidence is waning, “Toughen up! Get over it. Grow a pair.” I wish those phrases were the magical cure. They are now empty words for an athlete. They do not know how to ‘toughen up, or get over it. We now must coach ’em! 

Let’s look at each one individually. Past successes: you must take the athlete back either visually or by use of video to when they did the skill set well. It’s amazing how this works. If your pitcher cannot throw strikes now but had great games in the past, you must take time to visualize those moments in the mind or actual video. You see second dimension has to be intentional. Again, using live examples or video from the Internet let them see ‘others’ do the skill well. The best receiver coach I ever knew used to show his receivers Jerry Rice’s 50 greatest catches on video prior to the game. The results were outstanding. Encouragement from others: this may be the most difficult. Because now you must affirm that which is good while in the midst of correcting that which needs to be corrected. For some reason this seems to be the hardest to do….to affirm. We live in a culture that is so critical of that which is wrong or what we don’t like…but seem to be blind to that which is good…specifically.
