Let me give you an example of how I destroyed confidence as a young coach. My first year as a head coach I was so excited and wanted our kids to play so well. In the first game I coached, we won the toss and received the kickoff. The young man deep, bobbled, fumbled and then jumped on the ball on our 6-yard line. It was first down from deep in our own territory and I was going to be bold. We’re going to throw on first down and I called a very conservative throw but a throw never the less. It called for all five offensive linemen to block down in their gap towards the center. The two backs in our backfield were to block the end man on the line of scrimmage. This is one of the most conservative and traditional blocks… seven protecting the quarterback. The two outside receivers were to run fade routes with the inside slot receiver running a seam route. The quarterback was to take three steps and throw to a spot to one of the outside receivers. Very conservative play that usually ends up with a completion of 25 yards are more or, at worst, an incomplete pass. The center snapped the ball well, the right tackle stepped down well, the left guard and left tackle stepped down well, the backs blocked well, receivers ran a good route… all things good except for one. The right guard did not step down to his left in the gap and the defense blitzed a linebacker through that gap. As the quarterback set his feet the linebacker hit him, ball came loose and their defense recovered in our end zone for a touchdown for them. My first offensive play as a head coach was a fumble recovery for a touchdown for the other team. I remember watching all 11 offensive players with their heads down as they came toward the sideline. As they approached me, in my loudest voice I yelled, “What in the hell is going on out there?!?” Now let me ask you something. How many players did it right? 10. Never affirmed anything to those 10. I only corrected the right guard, which I needed to do. The offense was shot for the rest of the game. Why? Because I did not have the ability to affirm that which was good in the midst of fixing that which was bad. Kids today are so used to seeing failure all around them. Statistics share that one out of every two kids do not have their biological parents at home.2 I am not getting on the divorce issue because praise God, literally, thank God for great step moms, step dads, single moms, and single dads who hold their family together. But let’s be real, half the kids have seen failure in a most precious part of their life…family! You combine that with all the negativity that they experience through media, friends and society… you see why coaches say that today’s kids are so fragile when it comes to confidence. It is pivotal and must be practiced every day to begin to verbalize specifically, when we see things done well. See I was that typical coach. When something needed corrected I was so specific. If a quarterback was sailing the ball over the receivers head I would be specific in how to correct it… “you need to get your elbow in, ball high by your ear.” And when he did it right? I would say things like, ”good job, way to go, that a boy.” Do you see the difference? Now when I see a quarterback make a good throw I will say something like, “I love that he got your elbow in”… “ball placement on your take away by your year was perfect”. It changes everything. The “confidence meter” goes sky high when I am specific on the correction. Try it. You’ll have to practice it. It is so counter-culture. But this generation will gain confidence so much quicker if we can become coaches of past successes, watching others succeed and specific encouragement. I’ve come a long way since that first year as a grad assistant coach. I was coaching receivers and wanted to make a great impression on the other coaches on the staff that I could coach well. Coach called a pass play and it happened to be to the receiver standing near me on the sideline. It was a simple route, a hitch route. The receiver had a great stance, got off the ball well, had a great fake, got into his break well, hands up. The ball was thrown perfectly. Right before he caught the ball he turned his head to see where the defensive back was and of course, dropped the ball. Do you know what my comment was? I’m not kidding you. I said in a loud voice, “You dropped the ball, you turned your head to quickly”. Now think about that. Was I a fan or a coach? You know the answer. I was no different than the other 60,000 fans in the stands. Now, I might say, “Great stance, great takeoff, great break, way to get your hands up…” and before I can correct it athletes today will say, “Coach I pulled my head to early.” And that’s it. They never do it wrong again. Their confidence goes to a high level when I can affirm what was done well while I correct that which needs to be corrected. You will have to practice this. It is so counter-culture. That’s why we call it a second dimension coaching.