To this day I still receive texts, emails and phone calls from the very first team I coached as a 22-year-old head cross country coach, thanking me for some life lesson they experienced as an high schooler that now has made a significant impact on their life as an adult. I was just winging it with things I tried. I love competing AND making a difference. It’s what drew me to coaching then and still does today….the competition and the life lessons! I knew I was making a difference in the lives of the athletes. I just didn’t have a strategic vision. I so wanted one. I want somebody to affirm and guide me in my coaching because I really did love it. Oh, how I wish I had the 3Dimensional coaching framework as a young coach. And remember, 3Dimensional coaching is not an app, it is not a study, it is not a ‘how to.’ It is a framework. I could see the shelves inside the frame as a young coach that I needed to stock. I had the desire. I could find plenty of stock items for the first dimension I still love going to clinics, asking coaches how they’re playing, what their off-season training program looks like. Now I’m beginning to do the same thing with in the second dimension. And it began to happen after losing my job in the administration world and coming back to the coaching world. I can now be creative and implement strategies because I know the issues of second dimension…making a difference…now, in life and into the future. The research calls it the attribution theory1, in other words, understanding the confident mindset. Four great things take place when you can begin coaching a confident mindset using the three strategies listed in the prior section. When you ‘coach’ a confident mindset…reminding athletes of Past successes, watch other succeed and specific encouragement you create an internal and external attribution within the athlete. Internal attribution: the athlete takes responsibilities for those factors that are under their control… External attribution: while not blaming themselves for failures around them that are beyond their control. Think about that. Isn’t that what we want? An athlete that says “I can do what I can do even if there’s failure around me. I don’t blame others.” Think how counterculture that is. I can do what I can do no matter if others fail around me. Sport is full of successes and failures. But when I am able to focus on the successes and distance myself from failure, oh my, how confidence increases performance. This is called the internal and external attribution of understanding the confident mindset.