As coaches we must understand when one’s identity is wrapped up in anything, it will produce emotions. And with sport being a major item of which the culture identifies with, this performance culture will produce heightened emotions. In fact, you need to know that emotion is a response to performance.1 You cannot create it, it just happens. But the emotion that is exhibited has a direct influence on the performance. We have seen that. It affects us physiologically (crying), psychologically (lose or gain focus), behaviorally (pout, rant, wimp out).2 There’s also the emotions such a joy, excitement, satisfaction, etc. If you’re like most coaches, you really don’t know what to do with all the emotions. I remember as a coach being on one of those “yellow-dog” bus trips for an away game with a high school team and if that bus ride was more than 30 minutes, well you know how 16 year olds will act…out of control! They would be all over to place acting goofy. After a few minutes of listening to all these emotional outbursts, it drove me crazy. I didn’t know what to do with all these emotions, so here was my “go to” move. As a coach, you always sit on one of the front seats of the bus. I would stand up and face the team, blow by whistle as loud as I could, and tell them to shut up, sit down and think about the game! Now, they did two of the three. They did sit down and they did shut up. Why? Because “coach says” (two of the most powerful words in the life of an adolescent in our culture…”coach says”). As far as thinking about the game, looking back, I don’t think so. 

It seems as if we have the two extremes with coaching. 1.) The one coach who has no control and lets the kids just run amok. Their emotions are all over a place. Or 2.) The coach that makes everybody be quiet, lineup and march in cadence. I couldn’t tell you which was best or worst or anything in between. As a coach I just knew I liked to be in control. I had a tendency to be the one to make them line up and shut up. I think I did this out of my OWN need for them to look good in the eyes of others (tells you a little about my own identity). At least if they were quiet and inline they could not hurt anybody else. But what if I actually knew which emotions helped performance and which ones hurt performance? Now, if I did…emotions become my ally and my assistant coach. I now get excited to see the response of athletes with their emotions so I can use it to aid in performance. 
So as you see on the screen, learn this matrix. Here goes: There are pleasant emotions that help performance; (excitement, exhilaration joy). There are also pleasant emotions that harm performance (satisfaction, complacency). Unpleasant emotions that help performance (short-term frustration, short term anger). And unpleasant emotions that harm performance (fear, desperation, long-term anger, shame, embarrassment, guilt, distress).3 Now let’s break them down.
