I think it’s important we stop and pause for a moment when we talk about these emotions. There is a tendency to think that being a great second dimensional coach means you have to be a soft and passive coach. Many first dimensional coaches only believe that having relational strategies with the mind and the heart of athletes and their parents makes for a softer and weak performance. Nothing can be further from the truth! This is not a coaching methodology of holding hands in the huddle, singing 5 verses of Kumbaya and coming out and getting our butts whipped. Many will say I just cannot be “positive” all the time. Well according to the research and personal experience, I agree. In fact, there’s a counterintuitive concept that must be understood. Positive emotions don’t always lead to improved performance. Negative emotions don’t always hurt performance. I really want us to spend time grasping these concepts of which emotions help or harm performance and why.

Two buzzwords that are thrown around in regard to athletes in the second dimension by coaches are these. “All we want is great attitude and great effort. You give me those two things and I will teach you the rest.” That is a strong indicator that we are dealing with a first dimensional coach only. Of course, if kids came to practice every day with a great attitude and great effort… “Coach I love being here, I so much look forward to practice every day, I hope we’re out there all day. I don’t ever want to come in,” I know a lot of you are snickering right now. “Yeah, where are those athletes?” What if I told you It was already inside them and maybe, just maybe, it has gotten lost in the current culture of sport. 
There is one in emotion that always feels good and stimulates this type of attitude and effort where the athlete wants to play at their very best, whatever that skill level is…with great attitude and great effort. That is the emotion of joy. Remember, joy cannot be manufactured. It is a response. And the verb that causes that response is love. When you really love someone you will do anything for them with great attitude and great effort…. Joy! But as we are learning throughout this teaching, that which seems to be so good and right seems to be lacking in our culture in general and now sport specifically. Why? Because we have bought into a lie of only looking at outcomes, and not understanding the PROCESS that creates a joyful response.

I love my wife. I really do. I love my children. I really do. And when I see them succeed or do something really well, I have great joy and it leads me with a great desire be a better husband and better father. I now use the emotion of joy as my own check and balance as a husband and father. When there is a lack of joy in my family, I now look inside of me and ask “why?” And usually it is me that needs change (strategy) my behavior so that love is exhibited to them. See the difference? I now realize my own heart instead of blaming the circumstances or others. Now don’t get me wrong, this has been a process. For too many years I valued my worth to my family by extrinsic measurements. Trying to make more money so I could provide for my family, telling my children that they’d need to get a certain education to be successful. None of these are wrong when they become blessings, but when they became my driver as a husband and father… joy was sucked out of my family. Remember, when I lost my job at Disney and I called my wife and told her? Her response… “What happened to the man that I married that loved being a high school coach?” You know what she was saying in essence? Where has the joy gone? I have now (finally) learned this. When what you do becomes who you are and you lose what you do you find out who you really are. And I was a man that had lost my joy. Laying out in that driveway, all I could think about was how much I loved coaching and the relationships that are created. There goes that word again… Love… In the matrix of emotions, joy is an emotion that feels good and always increases performance. I am a coach. I like to feel good and I like my kids playing with great attitude and great effort. Now, when I see a lack of joy in my athletes that I’m coaching, when complacency settles in, instead of getting mad I now look inside and say, “What can I do to create a practice that allows joy to run rampant?” In the matrix, if there’s an emotion that increases performance then we need to enhance it, support it and promote it. So here’s the question you need to ask yourself? Is your program a program of joy? Or have you become so caught up in trying to become great that you’ve lost the essence of the joy in your program? Do your kids love (there’s that word again) coming to practice, being with each other and performing at the best of their ability day in and day out?
