So I made a statement that said maybe this joy is already in us and was created in us. So when it comes to a great attitude and great effort, when was it in your life that the emotion of joy seemed to come naturally? When you were a kid and you went out to play. Think about when you are a kid and nobody told you what you had to do…Mom said, “Go out and play,” and you did…you loved playing something. Pickup basketball, home run derby, one hand touch football (or maybe even tackle), building forts, making ramps and jumps with your bike, and on and on it goes. You were playing. Playing is the root of sport. You would stay out all day, if your mom would let you, no matter how hot or cold, whether you had proper hydration are not… and would play hard all day. You didn’t even count the length of time. In fact, you hated “coming in.” It took darkness, or Mom making you come in for dinner for you to stop. You competed for the love (there it is again) of the game. You played HARD…full throttle…pedal to the medal…and no one made you! I hear this from coaches all over, kids and parents have lost the love of the game. I agree. Because in a culture of entitlement it’s always about “what’s next.” When you played… the only “next” was the next game! Play! When you played you were full of joy and wonderment. It came from deep within. Why? Because we were created to play. But the last generation or so we have replaced the term “play” with word “work.” Sport is to never be “worked” at, it is to be “played.” 

Please don’t misconstrue the concept. Sport can be hard, it can be difficult, it can have tough moments, but it should have great joy. That’s what great play is…it can be hard, it can be difficult, it can have tough moments but it always produces joy. When you played as a kid you had to handle difficult situations, tough moments with kids that were better than you, but you handled it. You figured it out. Why? Because you loved playing? We have now substituted words in sport from “playing” to words like “grinding,” and ‘drills.” Grinding is for wheat or corn and drills are for the dentist. When kids love playing they will stay after it (grinding) and work repetitively on getting better (drills). So how did this happen? Where did we lose the playground and create the practice field? Because we forgot the essence of sport...PLAY! You do not have to tell a two-year-old to run and jump until they’re exhausted. Instead of creating the playing field or court, like you did when you played in the street, the driveway, the front yard, in the barn… So many adults now try to create the playing field or court for them. We have perfectly groomed little league fields, fancy uniforms, air conditioned courts. You see what happened? We have robbed the kids of the wonderment and the joy of creating the experience. Think about that word “create.” Where does “create” come from, from within (intrinsic). So what is sport? It’s simply “play” with the scoreboard. I did not have to tell my boys to play hard, but once I saw they were pretty good at something I would compare them with other kids. We would have a race in the front yard or see which one could climb the tree the fastest. We created a scoreboard. I love competition but for many years I lost the joy of “playing” the game as I only focused on the scoreboard.

If you want to try your own little experiment, next time you go to a little league baseball game, or a high school football game, take a look around and watch the “play” games going on around the facility. Kids at the baseball game will be playing wall-ball off the maintenance shed, pickup football on a side field (maybe even the parking lot) with just the spillover of the lights from the stadium. Just watch and observe their attitude and effort. Full throttle for as long as you let them. So here’s the coaching strategy of the second dimension. When you begin to see complacency (a pleasant emotion that harms performance), you need to shut it down, and replace it with sport specific “play” activities that brings the “love” of the game back into focus where joy is the response. And watch what happens to attitude and effort.
