There are some unpleasant emotions that always harm performance. These emotions are; fear, desperation, panic, rage or long term anger, embarrassment, shame, guilt, distress. For some reason we still have coaches and players who think the idea of “reducing others” somehow elevates themselves. No one is elevated, all we do is de- elevate. For some reason many coaches think it is cute to tear down or belittle or embarrass others. This includes the opposition. Creating an “us vs. them” mentality only teaches the adolescent mind that long-term anger is a good quality… which usually leads to some type of distress or fear or sadness... bad quality. Sport, should never be a vehicle to teach anger or shame. It seems our culture does that very well on its own. These types of unpleasant emotions cause the following; 1. Raises the intensity level too high which hinders technical and tactical execution 2. Can cause a physical and psychological shutdown of the athlete. What saddens me is the amount of anger and shame that we hear on so many fields and courts across our land. It seems as if cursing a player is some kind of norm and to be expected. Do you know why coaches curse? Because they don’t have any other strategy to properly intrinsically motivate athletes when they see a lesser performance than expected, and these external barrages have to be continued to a putrid level!  Why? Because when it is external, as we have learned, it is never enough. What starts out as a “dammit” for poor performance, quickly becomes a “G—dammit,” and after a while it doesn’t mean a thing so we add terms like “get your lazy a-- in gear, G—dammit,” which in no time becomes “get your lazy f------ a—in gear G—Dammit.” It is so common to hear this across sports fields. What are we teaching? What are we modeling? Can you imagine if an algebra teacher said to a student that was running late and forgot their homework, “you lazy son of a b----, get you’re a—out of my classroom?” They would be fired immediately! So if it is improper to say that in a math class, what gives us the right to do that on a ball field? There’s only one answer. I don’t know any better. I only know how to coach in the first dimension.