So why all this discussion about triggers and what we say and do? Simple. Coaches create influence and lifelong legacy. You are being mimicked and modeled just because you are called, COACH. And let’s be honest. How did the majority of us learn how to coach? By how we were coached. Coaching is an apprenticeship type position. We learn from those that we played for or coached with. In early America, if you wanted to be a blacksmith, you became an apprentice with a blacksmith until you could properly ’shoe’ a horse. And that is how coaching has been for so long, But something has changed. The culture of entitlement (me first) has changed faster than the coaching techniques. Two generations ago we would not even be discussing the terms second and third dimension. Why? Because this was what the home provided. If you had an issue with a non-motivated athlete, one lacking in confidence, one who’s emotions controlled them in a negative way, you just simply called home. You told parents what the issue were and they handled it. Now what happens when you call home? You may get blamed for the problem! Or, there is no one there to handle the problem. Either way… you’ve got a problem. You now have to be a coach of the second dimension. And as we said earlier, this is the hardest time to coach, but the most rewarding, because you are given the greatest opportunity influence the next generation. You are listened to. Remember the two most powerful words in the mind of an adolescent…’Coach Says’. You are one of the last remaining authority figures that can tell a kid to get on the bus and they will…even if they don’t even know where the bus is going! INFLUENCE…LEGACY. Many will forget their 10th grade math teacher, but all will remember their coach!  There is no greater time than to be one who can gain emotional mastery. Sport is emotional because of our identity with it, so let’s use the emotions to enhance sport for the good, thus creating great influence in the lives of the athletes and parents, leaving a legacy of good! Coaches, you and your athletes can gain mastery over their emotions so they can ‘help’ rather than ‘hurt’ competitive performances. To do this you must; 1. Be aware of the emotional responses around you (emotional matrix), 2. Control it. Know when to play it up. Know when to shut it down. And you must practice this. Practice this it home with your family, at work with your colleagues, with your friends when out in a casual situation and of course with your athletes. Become a master of the emotions, in other words, be a coach, not a fan.