Did you ever have a group of athletes, that were not necessarily your best athletes you have ever had, but somehow they came together and played collectively at a higher performance than you imagined? Or on the contrary, you had a group of athletes, may be some of your best athletes, and yet they never reached their full potential as a team. Yet, you coached them both the same! What was the difference? 
You got lucky with that first group because all four components of making a team a team just happened, and with the second they did not happen. It is now more common to have teams NOT gel, or have great team chemistry, or become ‘family’ or whatever other terms you would like to use. Creating Team Cohesion is now a critical combination of first dimension and second dimension strategies. Most all coaches get the first dimension strategy and sometimes we just get lucky with the second dimension strategy. As a coach, I do not want to depend on the “lucky.” You know the old saying: “Luck is on the side of the most prepared.” In fact, now-a-days, when a team of individuals come together as “one,” it is the exception and usually makes for a great story of excelled performance. Why is it now the exception?
We have spent a lot of time discussing the two generations of entitlement (definition overlaying next three sentences). Athletes and their parents focus on “me” instead of “we.” Now you have a generation that values its identity on having more. Remember, this phenomenon is in all socioeconomic strata. Whatever level (affluent, middle income, low income), we have this insatiable appetite for more. So the focus is on “me.”

And yet we are drawn to sport and to be on “team”. There is such a yearning to be a part of a team, something greater than ourselves. We get excited when we see the sum of the parts becomes greater than the individual parts. We know it is “the right thing” and always makes for greater team performance, but we’re not modeled that very much in society. And as we said before, sport gives us an identity to be a part of a team, even if the cause is just to win a district championship.

This is not new to any of you but as we have discussed we can no longer just complain about what we don’t like (being a fan) but rather we need to have a strategy to create team unity. As a culture we are so drawn to that. Did you know just about every sport movie based on a true story (though usually Hollywood embellished) is a story of second dimension. In fact, it is usually based on this component of second dimension…. Team cohesion. How this group of individuals that have various obstacles, somehow come together and form a team that produces extraordinary performances. Think about it; Rudy, Miracle, The Rookie, Hoosiers, Remember the Titans, Bagger Vance, Blind Side and on and on it goes. The only thing that changes; the sport and the time period it happens. This individual or group of individuals is struggling and a key figure, usually a coach, come together and unite it as one… Team Cohesion.
