Well, if you’re like me I wanted to know the formula for making a team a team. Dr. Albert Carron spent the majority of his professional life researching this question. He taught at the University of Western Ontario in Canada. I got so excited about his research that I actually drove to Canada and spent days with him discussing this. He came up with his group environmental quotient and I have been using it for two decades. It works! Dr. Carron defines team cohesion as a dynamic process that is reflected in the tendency of a group to come together in the pursuit of its goal.1 The key word is a dynamic process. Process indicates the strategy and dynamic means it is always in motion. It’s not just a one and done strategy but a continuum through the duration of the athlete’s journey while playing (not working) with you. I always knew this was so important, I just didn’t have any coaching educational research to guide me. Here was my best strategy for years. I bought the athletes an undershirt every year. One year it said “There is no I in team.” The next year it had a big “WE” with a little “me.” The next year it read “One Heartbeat.” My intentions were good, and somehow I just hoped when they wore the shirt it would ‘osmosify ‘ in them. 

To understand the team cohesion formula we must first grasp the two distinct scopes. The first component deals with the ones we coach. When we coach we deal with individuals. That is, focusing on the particular concerns of an individual within the team or with the group. The next component, the function of the group without regard to concerns for the individual. So the first scope deals with individual and group. For example when I teach to the class I am focusing on the whole group. When an individual student comes up to discuss their grade, my focus is on the individual and their particular concern. Coaching is the same way. I am either coaching the team, or individuals. The second scope deals with task and relational. Task; that is, how the team members perform to a measured goal, usually physical (first dimension). Why? Because sport is physical and we must always be a great coach in the first dimension…. Relational; the relationships within the team (second dimension). We now are going to combine them between the first scope and the second scope to create the matrix or formula for team cohesion. So as you see on the screen make sure you have all four components at hand of the matrix as related to team cohesion; individual – task, group – task, individual – relational, group – relational.
