The first half of the equation of the team cohesion formula is the simplest to understand because all coaches implement it. Both of these deal with task or the physical component of competing in sport. Individual – task: developing each athlete in all areas of the first dimension. For example, in basketball we practice individual shooting, dribbling, rebounding and passing. We have many different drills both in season and out a season to help us get better with these. Let’s say in practice the guards are working on dribbling and passing and the low post athletes were working on positioning and rebounding. Group-task: You now see if the guards can bring the ball up the court and run the offense try to get the ball into low post by passing or shooting. All team sports break their practices into this practice schedule. Baseball and softball… Individual-task: hitting, pitching, fielding, throwing, and running. Group-task: in- field turning a double play…. Live pitching seeing if the batters can hit the ball and get on base. In football we actually divide our practices into; individual, group and team (either offense are defense). You get the picture. I cannot imagine any coach not working on individual-task and group-task. Why? Because we have gotten great at first dimension principles. We are getting athletes bigger, stronger, quicker. Side note; one of the criticisms of youth travel teams is they spend too much time on group-task and not enough on individual-task. They play a ton a game’s without really getting better individually. That is because we are mesmerized by the scoreboard, the spice of sport. I know this seems so simple but remember, it is only half of the equation of what needs to be done in order to develop a cohesive team. The next two, which are second dimensional in nature, are where most coaches are inept or ignorant.

The first part of this is individual-relational, that is: “The quality of the individual members’ relationship within the team.” This is the part where everyone knows what they bring to the team that makes the team better because of who they are, not what they’d do athletically… that everyone feels affirmed that they bring their unique relational qualities to the team. This includes the stars, the starters and the backups. Now if you’re watching this you are probably thinking how? Because second dimensional concepts are fairly easy to teach but hard to measure… they have to be seen. 
Remember, team cohesion is defined as a dynamic process. Just like you continue with individual-task and group-task you do the same in the second dimension with individual-relational. In the next session, you will hear about a very simple, yet powerful, individual-relational strategy that we use at the end of every practice. It’s a great example that you can implement if you want, or, come up with your own. But realize this… if you want your team to come together, you have to develop individual-relational strategies that help each individual athlete on the team understand their value RELATIONALLY to the team… not based on what they DO, but based on who they are.
