influence is an attempt to change the behavior of others. others can be peers, supervisor or lower level employees.
some characteristics of influence:
1. it is inherently not good or bad
2. it can be selfish
3. it can subvert organizational objectives
4. it can enhance the effectiveness
so what is influence all about. why do we need influence. suppose we want to indroduce any change and we need to convince some other person with the change
.In that case we need to influence others so that they can accept the change we desire. ok , now there are various influence tactics:
consultation: seeking someones participation in a decision or change. rational persuasion: convince by detailed explanation or logic
inspiration appeals: appeal someones emotions, values to generate enthusiasm. ingratiating tactics: make some one feel important or good. coalition tactics: seeking
the help of someoen to persuade. pressure tactics: threaten someone to convince. upwared appeals: seek help from upper management to convince. exchange tactics:
offer someone in exchange to convince that person. power is the ability and authority is the right. power is tha ability to marshal resources to get things done.
authority is the right to direct others activities. power has the ability to get results but authority may or may be not has the right to get results.
there are 3 expressions of power. power over, power to and power from. power over is the ability to dominate. power to is the ability to act freely and power over
is to resist the demand of others. so there is a trait theory. there is one old and one modern theory. note down the old traits. modern trait is emotional
intelligence. what is emotional intelligence. EI is the ability to control one's emotion and behavior in a complex social setting. some traits associated with EI are:
self awareness: be aware of ones own strength and weaknesses
self management : be able to monitor and controal ones own emotion and behavior
social awareness : be able to read others emotions and behavoir. kind of being aware of surrounding
relationship management: ability to manage a social environment throught ones behavior
what is leadership. leadership in inspiring and guiding others with a common effort.
philosophy about behaviour: outside visialbe behavior is more important than the inner states. from the observable behavior comes the behavior modification.
what is the relationship between behavior and behavior modification. nadler tushman model. 4 key variables. anticipatory: changes based on expected situations.
reations: changes based on unexpected situations. incremental: subsequent or incremental changes to keep the organization on course. strategic: the goal or 
the direction of the ogranization is completely changed. kaizen is the japanese term meanining "continuous improvement". why do employees resist changes?
i will just write down the points for cheat sheet and explain them in my own words.
surprise: unexpected changes threaten employees
inertia : status quo. we are used to do things like this. we don't that way here
misunderstanding/ignorance: without proper training the changes are perceived as negative.
lack of trust: suppose the changes are promised to bring improvement but employees turn deaf to such announcements if they do not trust th management.
fear of failure: employees fear they might not make up to the new challenges.
emotional side effects: forced acceptance of changes makes the employees very angry
personality conflicts: employees dislike their managers so the changes introduced are also not well accepted
poor timing: suppose the employee is asked for out of state transfer when a close relative of his is sick
lack of tact: there is a proper way to communicate change. 
threat to job status: employees are worried that change can cause threat to therir job status
that was all why there is resistance to changes.
Now how to oppose the resistance to the change?
ASK QUESTION ABOUT "MANIPULATION AND CO-OPTATION"? WHAT IS IT
nadler tushman model. 